                                                                                                                                                                                         nature research | reporting summary
                                                                                                     Corresponding author(s): Owen Sansom
                                                                                                     Last updated by author(s): Apr 22, 2021



Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.




Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
           The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
           A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
           The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
           Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.

           A description of all covariates tested
           A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
           A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
           AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)

           For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
           Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.

           For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
           For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
           Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
                                                Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.


Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
  Data collection        Applied Biosystems StepOnePlus PCR system using StepOne software version 2.3 (qPCR).

  Data analysis          Data analysis was undertaken using -
                         Microsoft Excel 2016
                         Graphpad Prism version 8.02
                         HALO V2.0.1145 (Indica Labs)
                         FastQC v0.11.8
                         TrimGalore! v0.6.4
                         HISAT2 v2.1.0
                         FeatureCounts v1.6.4
                         DESeq2 v1.22.2
                         edgeR v3.28.1
                         Limma
                         R v3.6.0

For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and   April 2020
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.




                                                                                                                                                                                               1
Data




                                                                                                                                                                            nature research | reporting summary
Policy information about availability of data
 All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
    - Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
    - A list of figures that have associated raw data
    - A description of any restrictions on data availability

Data availability - All data relevant to this study are available from the authors at reasonable request. The RNAseq datasets that support the findings described here
have been deposited at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo) with the study accession code GSE168478. All source data are available
as a Source Data file. The remaining data are available within the Article, Supplementary Information or available from the authors upon request.




Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
    Life sciences                       Behavioural & social sciences                   Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf




Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
  Sample size              For all in vivo experiments, power analyses were carried out to determine cohort sizes based upon effect size and SD derived from
                           unpublished experiments in similar GA models previously carried out within the lab, and from early pilot studies which were carried out within
                           experimental and control cohorts. Power analyses were carried out using the G* power software package 3.1.9.4 (HHU Dusseldorf), typically
                           defining alpha=0.05 and beta=0.2. Animal studies were also carried out respecting the limited use of animals in line with the 3R system:
                           Replacement, Reduction, Refinement. For all other experiments, sample sizes were not statistically pre-determined, but were based upon
                           results from prior experiments in these and related model systems.

  Data exclusions          No data were excluded, unless mentioned otherwise.

  Replication              For all in vivo and ex vivo experiments carried out, individual animals of control and experimental cohorts are biologically unique - here
                           replicate data represents analysis of data/samples from independent replicate animals and is denoted by "n". All experiments were repeated
                           on at least three independent occasions using the same experimental approach, and all attempts at replication were successful.

  Randomization            To minimise genetic variability, all experimental and control animals were generated on inbred genetic backgrounds, or where that was not
                           possible, were generated from individual breeding colonies. Where possible, control and experimental animals were co-housed independent
                           of genotype and cohorts were comprised of a balance of both male and female animals. in order to reduce the impact of covariates such as
                           gender or housing, animals were recruited to treatment groups in a partially randomised manner while taking these factors into account.

  Blinding                 For animal welfare reasons, researchers were not blinded to genotype during study and data collection. The investigator(s) were blinded to
                           genotype or treatment during data analysis.




Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.

Materials & experimental systems                                  Methods
n/a Involved in the study                                         n/a Involved in the study
           Antibodies                                                        ChIP-seq
           Eukaryotic cell lines                                             Flow cytometry
           Palaeontology and archaeology                                     MRI-based neuroimaging
           Animals and other organisms
           Human research participants                                                                                                                                      April 2020
           Clinical data
           Dual use research of concern




                                                                                                                                                                                  2
Antibodies




                                                                                                                                                                       nature research | reporting summary
  Antibodies used              Antibodies, along with their catalog numbers are included within the manuscript -
                               Cytokeratin-7 (Abcam, ab9021)
                               Cleaved-Caspase-3 (CST, #9661)
                               BrdU (BD Biosciences, #347580)
                               RFP (CST, #2555)
                               β-catenin (BD Biosciences, #610154)
                               SCA1/LY6A (R&D Biosystems, #177228)
                               YAP (CST, #4912)


  Validation                   Antibodies, along with their catalog numbers are included within the manuscript -
                               1.Cytokeratin-7 (Abcam, ab9021); validated by immunohistochemistry (including mouse). Species reactivity: Human, Pig
                               2. Cleaved-Caspase-3 (CST, #9661); validated by western blot, immunoprecipitation, immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence
                               and flow cytometry. Species reactivity: Human, Mouse, Rat, Monkey
                               3. BrdU (BD Biosciences #347580, 1/200 dilution); validated by flow cytometry. Species Reactivity: Mouse
                               4. RFP (CST, #2555); validated by western blotting and immunohisstochemistry. Species Reactivity: NA - exogenous expression only
                               5. β-catenin (BD Biosciences, #610154); validated by western blot, immunofluorescence, immunohistochemistry and
                               immunoprecipitation. Species reactivity: Human, Mouse, Rat, Dog, Chicken
                               6. SCA1/LY6A (R&D Biosystems, #177228); validated by ELISA, immunocytochemistry and flow cytometry. Species Reactivity: Mouse
                               7. YAP (CST, #4912); validated by western blot and immunoprecipitation. Species Reactivity: Human, Rat, Mouse, Monkey


Eukaryotic cell lines
Policy information about cell lines
  Cell line source(s)                  3D organoid lines from mouse intestinal crypts were derived at the Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute

  Authentication                       Organoid lines were authenticated by PCR genotyping

  Mycoplasma contamination             All cell lines are routinely tested for mycoplasma and it is considered that the lines used in the study are mycoplasma free.

  Commonly misidentified lines         No commonly misidentified lines were used in the study
  (See ICLAC register)


Animals and other organisms
Policy information about studies involving animals; ARRIVE guidelines recommended for reporting animal research
  Laboratory animals           Adult male and female genetically engineered mice of a C57BL/6J background were used in this study. Animals entered study at
                               between 6-12 weeks of age, and only once they had reached a minimum body weight of 20g. Mice were assessed for symptoms of ill
                               health at least 3 times per week, and humanely culled at upon reaching a clinical endpoint in line with UK Home Office regulations.
                               Animals were housed in conventional caging, with environmental enrichment on a 12 hour light-dark cycle in a temperature and
                               humidity controlled environment, with access to food and water ad libitum.

  Wild animals                 No wild animals were used in the study

  Field-collected samples      No field-collected samples were used in this study.

  Ethics oversight             All animal experiments were performed in accordance with UK Home Office regulations (Project licence 70/8646), with adherence to
                               the ARRIVE guidelines, and were reviewed and approved by the Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Board (AWERB) of the University
                               of Glasgow.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.




                                                                                                                                                                       April 2020




                                                                                                                                                                             3
