              molecules
Article
Saffron Pre-Treatment Promotes Reduction in Tissue
Inflammatory Profiles and Alters Microbiome Composition in
Experimental Colitis Mice
Suhrid Banskota 1,2 , Hassan Brim 3 , Yun Han Kwon 1,2 , Gulshan Singh 4 , Sidhartha R. Sinha 4 ,
Huaqing Wang 1,2 , Waliul I. Khan 1,2, * and Hassan Ashktorab 5, *

                                          1   Farncombe Family Digestive Health Research Institute, McMaster University, 1280 Main St. W,
                                              Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada; banskots@mcmaster.ca (S.B.); yyoon90@gmail.com (Y.H.K.);
                                              wanghu@mcmaster.ca (H.W.)
                                          2   Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada
                                          3   Department of Pathology, Cancer Center, Howard University College of Medicine,
                                              Washington, DC 20059, USA; hbrim@howard.edu
                                          4   Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA;
                                              gsingh10@stanford.edu (G.S.); sidsinha@stanford.edu (S.R.S.)
                                          5   Department of Medicine, Gastroenterology Division, Cancer Center, Howard University College of Medicine,
                                              Washington, DC 20059, USA
                                          *   Correspondence: khanwal@mcmaster.ca (W.I.K.); hashktorab@howard.edu (H.A.)
         
         
                                          Abstract: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic inflammatory condition of the gastroin-
Citation: Banskota, S.; Brim, H.;         testinal tract with an incompletely understood pathogenesis. Long-standing colitis is associated
Kwon, Y.H.; Singh, G.; Sinha, S.R.;       with increased risk of colon cancer. Despite the availability of various anti-inflammatory and
Wang, H.; Khan, W.I.; Ashktorab, H.       immunomodulatory drugs, many patients fail to respond to pharmacologic therapy and some ex-
Saffron Pre-Treatment Promotes
                                          perience drug-induced adverse events. Dietary supplements, particularly saffron (Crocus sativus),
Reduction in Tissue Inflammatory
                                          have recently gained an appreciable attention in alleviating some symptoms of digestive diseases.
Profiles and Alters Microbiome
                                          In our study, we investigated whether saffron may have a prophylactic effect in a murine colitis
Composition in Experimental Colitis
                                          model. Saffron pre-treatment improved the gross and histopathological characteristics of the colonic
Mice. Molecules 2021, 26, 3351.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
                                          mucosa in murine experimental colitis. Treatment with saffron showed a significant amelioration of
molecules26113351                         colitis when compared to the vehicle-treated mice group. Saffron treatment significantly decreased
                                          secretion of serotonin and pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6, in the colon
Academic Editors: Konstantinos            tissues by suppressing the nuclear translocation of NF-κB. The gut microbiome analysis revealed
Dimas and Nikolaos Pitsikas               distinct clusters in the saffron-treated and untreated mice in dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced
                                          colitis by visualization of the Bray–Curtis diversity by principal coordinates analysis (PCoA). Fur-
Received: 30 April 2021                   thermore, we observed that, at the operational taxonomic unit (OTU) level, Cyanobacteria were
Accepted: 27 May 2021                     depleted, while short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), such as isobutyric acid, acetic acid, and propionic
Published: 2 June 2021
                                          acid, were increased in saffron-treated mice. Our data suggest that pre-treatment with saffron inhibits
                                          DSS-induced pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion, modulates gut microbiota composition, prevents
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                          the depletion of SCFAs, and reduces the susceptibility to colitis.
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affil-
                                          Keywords: inflammatory bowel disease; saffron; gut microbiota; colitis; cytokines
iations.




                                          1. Introduction
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                                               Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic relapsing immune-inflammatory con-
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
                                          dition of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract with increasing prevalence worldwide [1]. IBD is
distributed under the terms and
                                          broadly classified into Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) on the basis of
conditions of the Creative Commons        their clinical presentation, but the risk factors implicated on the pathogenesis of both CD
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     and UC are similar [2]. The etiology of IBD is complex and various studies suggest that
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          its pathogenesis is associated with a dysregulated immune response, genetic factors, gut
4.0/).                                    microbiota, and environmental factors [2]. Various immunosuppressive synthetic drugs



Molecules 2021, 26, 3351. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules26113351                                       https://www.mdpi.com/journal/molecules
Molecules 2021, 26, 3351                                                                                           2 of 10




                           and biologics, such as salicylates, corticosteroids, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blockers,
                           and vedolizumab, are available as therapies for IBD, and many additional options are
                           in the pipeline [3–5]. Clinical data suggest that these therapies are limited in managing
                           the disease in some patients, while some fail to respond over time. Moreover, failure in
                           managing IBD over the long run deteriorates the inflammatory conditions and increases
                           the risk of developing colon cancer [6–10]. Therefore, alternative approaches in preventing
                           the induction or perpetuation of intestinal inflammation are important in decreasing the
                           incidence of IBD.
                                 Natural products, such as berberine, baicalein, curcumin, bromelain, and their chemi-
                           cal constituents, are reported to be effective in treating IBD, and the mechanism of action
                           involved in ameliorating inflammation has been widely studied [11]. Saffron (Crocus sativus)
                           has been used as a spice and for health management since ancient times and is reported
                           to play a key role in treatment of different digestive system disorders [12–15]. Saffron,
                           by virtue of its potent antioxidant property, showed a significant decrease in lipopro-
                           tein oxidation susceptibility (LOS) in human subjects and was evaluated as a promising
                           anti-obesity drug [16]. Crocin, a biologically active carotenoid constituent of saffron, was
                           demonstrated to protect against DSS-induced colitis in C57BL/6 J mice and suppressed
                           tumor growth in ApcMinC/Gpt mice by suppressing NF-κB-mediated inflammation [17].
                           NF-κB, an oxidative stress sensitive transcription factor, is associated with tissue induction
                           of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-6,
                           and IL-1β [18,19].
                                 Alteration in the enterochromaffin (EC) cell numbers and intestinal 5-HT content
                           has been observed in experimental colitis and in both UC and CD patients [20,21]. The
                           altered 5-HT plays a key role in the activation and transportation of immune cells to
                           produce proinflammatory cytokines by increasing angiogenesis [22–24]. Previous studies,
                           including ours, demonstrated that excessive serotonin (5-HT) secreted from EC cells during
                           DSS-induced inflammation in the gut plays an important role in the modulation of gut
                           microbial composition as well as gut function [25,26]. The human GI tract is colonized
                           with 1 × 1014 colony-forming units of bacteria and the colonization occurs soon after
                           birth [27]. Accumulating evidence suggest that the gut microbiota has an important role on
                           the pathogenesis of IBD. We previously demonstrated that 5-HT regulates the growth of
                           bacteria in a species-dependent manner and selects for a more colitogenic microbiota [26].
                           The effect of saffron on the altered 5-HT and composition of gut microbiota in DSS-treated
                           mice has not been evaluated so far.
                                 The current study was conducted to investigate whether saffron has prophylactic ef-
                           fects on an experimental colitis mice model by evaluating the secretion of pro-inflammatory
                           cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β in colon tissue, the colonic 5-HT level, assessing
                           the cecal microbiota composition, and analyzing the changes in short-chain fatty acids in
                           feces. The findings from this study will shed light on the translational perspective of the
                           protective effect of saffron in human IBD.

                           2. Results
                           2.1. Saffron Alleviated DSS-Induced Colitis in Mice
                                To investigate the prophylactic effect of saffron in mice, C57BL/6 mice were orally
                           gavaged with saffron (10 mg/kg and 20 mg/kg body weight of mice) based on a previ-
                           ous study [28], for four days prior to the administration of 2.5% dextran sodium sulfate
                           solution, and continued for another seven days along with DSS (Figure 1A). The severity
                           of the DSS-induced colitis, disease activity index (DAI), colon length, macroscopic score,
                           and histological score was significantly improved by saffron at a 20 mg/Kg dose while
                           saffron at the dose of 10 mg/Kg showed improvement in the DAI, macroscopic score, and
                           histological score (Figure 1B–F). The results indicate that saffron reduces the severity of
                           DSS-induced colitis in mice by improving the gross and histopathological characteristics of
                           the colonic mucosa.
Molecules 2021, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                             3 of 11




Molecules 2021, 26, 3351                                                                                                3 of 10
                                     DSS-induced colitis in mice by improving the gross and histopathological characteristics
                                     of the colonic mucosa.




                 Saffron reduced
      Figure1.1.Saffron
     Figure                reduced the
                                    the severity
                                         severity of
                                                   ofDSS-induced
                                                      DSS-inducedcolitis
                                                                     colitisininmice.
                                                                                  mice.Mice were
                                                                                         Mice wereorally  gavaged
                                                                                                     orally gavaged with  saffron
                                                                                                                       with        (10 mg/Kg
                                                                                                                              saffron  (10 mg/Kgand
      20 20
     and mg/Kg)
            mg/Kg)  or or
                       thethe
                            vehicle for 4
                               vehicle    days
                                       for 4    before
                                              days     the the
                                                    before administration
                                                               administration           DSS in
                                                                                  2.5%2.5%
                                                                              of of         DSS in    drinking
                                                                                               theirtheir       water
                                                                                                          drinking     and and
                                                                                                                    water   continued          days
                                                                                                                                         for 7for
                                                                                                                                  continued       7
     days along
      along       withDSS.
            with the     the DSS.  Inflammation
                              Inflammation    was was
                                                   assessed  by (A)by (A)
                                                        assessed           macroscopic
                                                                     macroscopic           appearance
                                                                                      appearance  of the of the colon
                                                                                                          colon        tissue;
                                                                                                                tissue; (B)     (B) colon
                                                                                                                             colon         length;
                                                                                                                                    length; (C)  the
     (C) the disease
      disease             activity
               activity index;      index; (D)
                                 (D) the          the score;
                                          macroscopic  macroscopic
                                                                (E) score;       (E) representative
                                                                    representative                       H&E-stainedofcolon
                                                                                        micrographs ofmicrographs           H&E-stained      colon
                                                                                                                                 cross-sections   on
     cross-sections
      day 7 post-DSS, on bar
                           day=7100   µM; andbar
                                   post-DSS,    (F)=the
                                                      100 µ M;  and (F)
                                                        histological      the Data
                                                                      score.    histological  score.
                                                                                       represent the Data
                                                                                                      mean ± represent
                                                                                                                SEM (n = the mean
                                                                                                                            4/group).   SEM
                                                                                                                                      ± *  p <(n  =
                                                                                                                                               0.05,
     4/group).  * p < 0.05,  compared    to
      compared to the vehicle-treated mice. the vehicle-treated  mice.

                                     2.2.
                                      2.2.Saffron
                                            SaffronPrevented
                                                      PreventedIncrease
                                                                  IncreaseininDSS-Induced
                                                                                DSS-InducedPro-Inflammatory
                                                                                                 Pro-InflammatoryCytokines
                                                                                                                         Cytokinesandand5-HT
                                                                                                                                         5-HTLevel
                                                                                                                                                 Levelin
                                                                                                                                                       in
                                     Mice
                                      MiceColonic
                                              ColonicTissue
                                                        Tissue
                                            AA number
                                                number of  ofdifferent
                                                               differentimmune
                                                                             immune      cells,
                                                                                     cells,      such as
                                                                                            such as          macrophages
                                                                                                        macrophages      and and
                                                                                                                              dendriticdendritic    cells,
                                                                                                                                          cells, promote
                                     promote the
                                      the              recruitment
                                            recruitment of             of additional
                                                                additional                immune
                                                                               immune cells        to cells  to inflamed
                                                                                                       inflamed              tissue. The
                                                                                                                   tissue. [29,30].    [29,30].  The in-
                                                                                                                                             increase    in
                                     crease in the
                                      the               pro-inflammatory
                                            pro-inflammatory                    cytokines
                                                                     cytokines such        as such
                                                                                              IL-6, as   IL-6, and
                                                                                                       IL-1β,   IL-1β,   and in
                                                                                                                      TNF-α   TNF-α     in tissue
                                                                                                                                   tissue  indicatesindi-
                                                                                                                                                        an
                                     cates   an aggravated
                                      aggravated       immuneimmuneresponse atresponse     at of
                                                                                    the site   the site of    inflammation.
                                                                                                   inflammation.                 Therefore,
                                                                                                                       Therefore, we           we ana-
                                                                                                                                          analyzed     the
                                     lyzed
                                      secretedthe secreted    pro-inflammatory
                                                   pro-inflammatory         cytokines incytokines
                                                                                             colonic  intissue
                                                                                                         colonic of tissue
                                                                                                                     mice of
                                                                                                                           andmice
                                                                                                                                 found andthat
                                                                                                                                            foundthe that
                                                                                                                                                     DSS-
                                     the  DSS-induced
                                      induced     increased increased     secretion
                                                               secretion of    IL-6, of   IL-6,
                                                                                     IL-1β,   andIL-1β,
                                                                                                     TNF-αandwasTNF-α     was significantly
                                                                                                                    significantly   reduced by  reduced
                                                                                                                                                   saffron
                                     by    mg/kg),
                                      (20saffron    (20reducing
                                                         mg/kg), the    severitythe
                                                                    reducing        of the  DSS-induced
                                                                                       severity of     the colitis.
                                                                                                            DSS-induced (Figure  2A–C).
                                                                                                                             colitis.      Additionally,
                                                                                                                                       (Figure    2A–C).
                                      we   found that
                                     Additionally,      wethe DSS-induced
                                                            found that     the increased
                                                                                DSS-induced    5-HT    level in5-HT
                                                                                                  increased      the colon
                                                                                                                       level in the was
                                                                                                                             tissue        significantly
                                                                                                                                      colon tissue   was
                                      inhibited
                                     significantly by the   saffron
                                                       inhibited   byat a
                                                                       thehigher
                                                                             saffrondose
                                                                                      at a(Figure
                                                                                            higher2E), dosefurther   supporting
                                                                                                             (Figure 2E),              supportingeffect
                                                                                                                                   the beneficial
                                                                                                                             further                  the
                                      of  saffron   in  preventing    colitis.  To investigate     the  mechanism      by  which
                                     beneficial effect of saffron in preventing colitis. To investigate the mechanism by which      saffron  suppressed
                                      the DSS-induced
                                     saffron   suppressed pro-inflammatory              cytokines, we analyzed
                                                               the DSS-induced pro-inflammatory                 cytokines,NF-κB    in the cytoplasmic
                                                                                                                             we analyzed      NF-κB in
                                      and nuclear
                                     the   cytoplasmic  protein
                                                            and of   the colon
                                                                 nuclear          tissues.
                                                                              protein        Thecolon
                                                                                        of the      nuclear   translocation
                                                                                                          tissues.             of NF-κB by
                                                                                                                     The nuclear                DSS was
                                                                                                                                      translocation     of
                                      significantly
                                     NF-κB              decreased by
                                               by DSS was                a higher
                                                              significantly          dose ofby a
                                                                                decreased      saffron   in mice
                                                                                                     higher        (Figure
                                                                                                             dose of         2E).inThese
                                                                                                                        saffron      mice data
                                                                                                                                           (Figureindicate
                                                                                                                                                     2E).
                                      that data
                                     These   saffronindicate
                                                       inhibitsthat
                                                                 DSS-induced       secretion of
                                                                      saffron inhibits              pro-inflammatory
                                                                                            DSS-induced        secretion ofcytokines     in mice colons
                                                                                                                              pro-inflammatory        cy-
                                      by   decreasing     the nuclear    translocation     of  NF-κB.
                                     tokines in mice colons by decreasing the nuclear translocation of NF-κB.
Molecules
 Molecules2021,
           2021,26,26,
                    3351
                       x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                     4 4ofof1011




     Figure 2. Pre-treatment with saffron inhibited the DSS-induced secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and the serotonin
     level in 2.
       Figure colon tissue. The with
                  Pre-treatment        saffronfrom
                                supernatants         the the
                                                inhibited homogenized
                                                               DSS-induced colon tissue were
                                                                                secretion  of analyzed  for (A) IL-6, (B)
                                                                                              pro-inflammatory    cytokines         theTNF-α,
                                                                                                                               and(C)
                                                                                                                           IL-1β,       seroto-
       nin(D)
     and   level in colon(5-HT).
               Serotonin   tissue. The supernatants
                                  Data represent       meanthe
                                                   the from      homogenized
                                                              ± SEM (n             colon* p
                                                                           = 4/group).   tissue  were
                                                                                            < 0.05,    analyzed
                                                                                                    compared   tofor
                                                                                                                  the(A) IL-6,   (B) IL-1β,
                                                                                                                       vehicle-treated       (C)
                                                                                                                                         mice.
       TNF-α,
     (E)        and (D)and
         Cytoplasmic    Serotonin
                             nuclear(5-HT). Data
                                      protein     represent
                                               extracted     thecolon
                                                          from    meantissues
                                                                          ± SEM were
                                                                                 (n = 4/group).   p < 0.05,
                                                                                       analyzed* for  NF-κB.compared    to the vehicle-treated
                                                                                                               Representative     blots of the
     cytoplasmic   and nuclearand
       mice. (E) Cytoplasmic    NF-κBnuclear
                                        fromprotein   extracted
                                              the colon  tissue offrom
                                                                    threecolon tissues
                                                                           random   micewere
                                                                                         fromanalyzed    for NF-κB.
                                                                                                each group.   The barRepresentative
                                                                                                                       graph represents    theof
                                                                                                                                        blots
       the cytoplasmic and nuclear NF-κB from the colon tissue of three random mice from each group. The bar graph repre-
     mean ± SEM. * p < 0.05, compared to the vehicle-treated mice.
       sents the mean ± SEM. * p < 0.05, compared to the vehicle-treated mice.
                                    2.3. Saffron Alters the Mouse Gut Microbiota Composition in DSS-Treated Mice
                                     2.3. Saffron Alters the Mouse Gut Microbiota Composition in DSS-Treated Mice
                                          To determine whether saffron alters the mouse gut microbiota composition, we ana-
                                           To determine whether saffron alters the mouse gut microbiota composition, we an-
                                    lyzed the cecal microbial composition in three different groups of mice which received DSS,
                                     alyzed
                                    DSS plusthe10 cecal
                                                    mg/kg  microbial
                                                             of saffron,composition
                                                                           and DSS plus in three   different
                                                                                            20 mg/kg          groupsAs
                                                                                                         of saffron.      mice which
                                                                                                                       of shown           received
                                                                                                                                  in Figure   3A,
                                     DSS,
                                    the     DSSdiversity
                                         alpha   plus 10 mg/kg
                                                             of theof    saffron,
                                                                     three        andwas
                                                                             groups    DSSnotplusdifferent.    of saffron.the
                                                                                                    20 mg/kgHowever,           shown
                                                                                                                            Asthree      in Figure
                                                                                                                                      groups    of
                                     3A, the
                                    mice   werealpha   diversity
                                                 separated     intoofdistinct
                                                                       the three   groupsaswas
                                                                               clusters,     shownnot different.  However,
                                                                                                       by visualization        theBray–Curtis
                                                                                                                           of the   three groups
                                     of mice by
                                    diversity   were    separated
                                                    principal        into distinct
                                                                coordinate    analysisclusters,
                                                                                         (PCoA)as     shown
                                                                                                   (Figure  3B;by
                                                                                                                p <visualization
                                                                                                                     0.05). The two ofgroups
                                                                                                                                        the Bray–
                                                                                                                                                of
                                    saffron-treated mice appeared more similar in composition while largely differedThe
                                     Curtis   diversity    by  principal    coordinate    analysis   (PCoA)    (Figure  3B;  p < 0.05).        two
                                                                                                                                            when
                                     groups ofto
                                    compared       saffron-treated
                                                     the DSS-treated  mice    appeared
                                                                           group.         more similar
                                                                                    In addition,           in composition
                                                                                                    the taxonomic             while(average
                                                                                                                      summaries       largely dif-
                                                                                                                                                of
                                    each    when at the
                                     feredgroup)     compared
                                                            phylumto the    DSS-treated
                                                                        level              group. In
                                                                              revealed greater          addition,
                                                                                                    similarity  between taxonomic
                                                                                                                    the the           summaries
                                                                                                                               saffron-treated
                                     (average
                                    mice.        of eachsaffron
                                           Moreover,       group)administration
                                                                    at the phylumdepleted
                                                                                       level revealed    greater similarity
                                                                                                 the Proteobacteria     phylum,between
                                                                                                                                  in which thethe
                                                                                                                                               saf-
                                     fron-treated    mice.  Moreover,      saffron   administration    depleted   the  Proteobacteria
                                    effect seems to be much greater at 20 mg/kg compared to 10 mg/kg of saffron (Figure 3C;               phylum,
                                      < which
                                    pin          the
                                         0.05); in    effect
                                                    turn,     seems
                                                           this  phylum        absentgreater
                                                                       to beismuch      in naïve   SPFmg/kg
                                                                                               at 20           compared
                                                                                                         mice [31].         to 10we
                                                                                                                      Similarly,   mg/kg    of saf-
                                                                                                                                       observed
                                     fron  (Figure   3C;  p < 0.05);  in  turn, this  phylum    is  absent  in naïve  SPF
                                    that, at the operational taxonomic unit (OTU) level, Cyanobacteria were depleted in the mice [31].  Similarly,
                                     we   observed mice
                                    saffron-treated    that, at
                                                             andthe    operational
                                                                  the effect          taxonomic
                                                                               was greater   at the unit  (OTU)
                                                                                                     dose of       level, (Figure
                                                                                                              20 mg/kg     Cyanobacteria     were
                                                                                                                                   3D, p < 0.05).
                                     depleted in the saffron-treated mice and the effect was greater at the dose of 20 mg/kg
                                    2.4. Saffron
                                     (Figure      Increased
                                               3D, p <       Beneficial Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs) in DSS-Treated Mice
                                                         0.05).
                                         SCFAs are vital for regulation of intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) functioning, to modulate
                                    their proliferation, differentiation, and promoting gut barrier function. SCFAs are known
                                    to be altered by a change in the microbiota composition [32]. To confirm the functional
                                    effect of the altered microbiota by saffron administration during DSS-induced colitis, we
                                    analyzed the SCFA levels in the feces by using gas chromatography–mass spectrometry
                                    (GC/MS). We found that saffron at both doses significantly increased isobutyric acid and
                                    acetic acid, while at higher dose it also increased propionic acid in feces (Figure 4).
 Molecules2021,
Molecules  2021,26,
                 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                    3351                                                                                                                       5 5ofof1110




      Figure3.3.Microbial
     Figure       Microbialcomposition
                              composition analysis
                                             analysis in the cecal samples of saffron
                                                                              saffron pre-treated
                                                                                       pre-treated and
                                                                                                    anduntreated
                                                                                                         untreatedmice
                                                                                                                   micechallenged
                                                                                                                           challengedwith
                                                                                                                                       with
      DSS.The
     DSS.   Thececal
                 cecalcontent
                         contentofof mice
                                     mice were
                                           were subjected
                                                subjected to 16S rRNA   partial sequencing
                                                                  rRNA partial  sequencingprofiling
                                                                                             profilinganalysis
                                                                                                       analysisand
                                                                                                                andthe
                                                                                                                     thefigure
                                                                                                                          figurerepresents
                                                                                                                                 represents
      (A)the
     (A)   thealpha
                alpha    diversity
                     diversity  of of
                                   thethe  three
                                       three     group
                                              group of mice        the the
                                                             usingusing
                                                         of mice       Chao1Chao1   index.
                                                                             index. (B)  PCoA  PCoA
                                                                                           (B) of  the of the Bray–Curtis
                                                                                                       Bray–Curtis           dissimilarity,
                                                                                                                   dissimilarity,  showing
    Molecules 2021, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                 6 of 11
      showing    distinct   microbiota   in each group   of mice. (C) Taxonomic    summaries   at the phylum   level. (D)
     distinct microbiota in each group of mice. (C) Taxonomic summaries at the phylum level. (D) Abundance of Cyanobacteria Abundance    of
      Cyanobacteria in the saffron-treated and untreated groups (n = 4/group).
     in the saffron-treated and untreated groups (n = 4/group).

                                     2.4. Saffron Increased Beneficial Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs) in DSS-Treated Mice
                                           SCFAs are vital for regulation of intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) functioning, to mod-
                                     ulate their proliferation, differentiation, and promoting gut barrier function. SCFAs are
                                     known to be altered by a change in the microbiota composition [32]. To confirm the
                                     functional effect of the altered microbiota by saffron administration during DSS-induced
                                     colitis, we analyzed the SCFA levels in the feces by using gas chromatography–mass
                                     spectrometry (GC/MS). We found that saffron at both doses significantly increased iso-
                                     butyric acid and acetic acid, while at higher dose it also increased propionic acid in feces
                                     (Figure 4).




     Figure  4. 4.
         Figure Saffron  prevented
                    Saffron  preventeddepletion
                                         depletion  the
                                                 of of   SCFA
                                                       the SCFAconcentrations
                                                                  concentrationsininfecal
                                                                                     fecal samples
                                                                                           samples of                               samples
                                                                                                                             Fecalsamples
                                                                                                                      mice.Fecal
                                                                                                        DSS-treatedmice.
                                                                                                     of DSS-treated                          of of
          werewere
     micemice    analyzed   for for
                      analyzed  determining   the the
                                     determining  concentration    of (A)
                                                        concentration      isobutyric
                                                                       of (A)         acid,
                                                                              isobutyric acid,  butyric
                                                                                            (B) (B)      acid,
                                                                                                    butyric acid,  acetic
                                                                                                               (C)(C)     acid,
                                                                                                                      acetic         lactic
                                                                                                                                (D)(D)
                                                                                                                             acid,           acid,
                                                                                                                                         lactic
     (E) acid, (E) acid,
         propionic propionic
                           (F) acid, (F) acid,
                               pentanoic pentanoic
                                                 andacid,
                                                       (G)and   (G) isovaleric
                                                            isovaleric         acid. Data
                                                                       acid. Data          represent
                                                                                   represent   the mean   mean
                                                                                                      the ±  SEM   SEM
                                                                                                                 ± (n = (n =          * p *<p <
                                                                                                                              4/group).
                                                                                                                        4/group).            0.05,
         0.05, to
     compared  compared
                    the to the    vehicle-treated
                        vehicle-treated           mice
                                          mice fecal     fecal sample.
                                                       sample.

                                       3. Discussion
                                            The application of natural and traditionally trusted medicinal product provides a
                                       safe alternative to manage inflammatory conditions in the gut. Saffron has been used
                                       since ancient days in diets, and its various components, such as crocin, crocetin, picro-
                                       crocin, and safranal, are reported to have significant efficacy in peptic ulcer, stomach
                                       cancer, ulcerative colitis, colorectal cancer, and pancreatic disorder [15,33,34]. A ran-
Molecules 2021, 26, 3351                                                                                            6 of 10




                           3. Discussion
                                 The application of natural and traditionally trusted medicinal product provides a safe
                           alternative to manage inflammatory conditions in the gut. Saffron has been used since
                           ancient days in diets, and its various components, such as crocin, crocetin, picrocrocin, and
                           safranal, are reported to have significant efficacy in peptic ulcer, stomach cancer, ulcerative
                           colitis, colorectal cancer, and pancreatic disorder [15,33,34]. A randomized, double blind,
                           placebo control trial conducted on mild to moderate ulcerative colitis patient suggested
                           that dietary saffron may be effective in reducing the severity of disease in UC patients by
                           improving the antioxidant factors [33]. Some other studies illustrated the protective effects
                           of the active constituents of saffron, such as crocin and safranal, against experimental
                           colitis [35,36]. In the present study, we investigated the effect of unfractionated saffron
                           in preventing DSS-induced colitis in mice by evaluating its effect on the serotonin level,
                           microbiota, and short-chain fatty acids. We found that supplementation of saffron along
                           with diet reduced the severe effect of DSS. A previous study reported slight, although
                           not significant restoration of colon length and percentage of weight loss in the safranal
                           (200 mg/kg, 500 mg/kg)-treated groups of mice, with a significant decrease in the DAI
                           score [37]. We found that the unfractionated saffron (20 mg/kg) treatment significantly
                           increased the colon length, decreased the DAI, and improved the histopathological charac-
                           teristics of the colonic mucosa, exhibiting its protective effects during experimental colitis.
                           The tissue levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α, were
                           significantly reduced in mice treated with saffron at the dose of 20 mg/Kg (Figure 2A–C).
                           This effect of saffron may be achieved by the virtue of its antioxidant property. NF-κB,
                           being a redox-sensitive transcription factor, is activated by various inflammatory insults
                           and translocate to the nucleus to induce proinflammatory cytokines during inflamma-
                           tion [16,17]. Saffron pre-treatment inhibited the nuclear translocation of p65 NF-κB in mice
                           colonic tissue samples, which corresponds to inhibition of the secretion of IL-6, IL-1β, and
                           TNF-α. Saffron at the same dose significantly inhibited the serotonin level in colon tissue
                           (Figure 2D). Serotonin was previously demonstrated to play a key role in the pathogene-
                           sis of experimental colitis by priming colon epithelial cells to inflammation. It has been
                           previously revealed that serotonin modulates the gut function and gut microbiota compo-
                           sition by selecting colitogenic microbiota [38]. The amount of serotonin was significantly
                           decreased in the saffron-pretreated mice, and it can be speculated that saffron may inhibit
                           the oxidative stress probably by activating an antioxidant mechanism [33]. Additionally,
                           disturbance in gut microbiota composition is largely associated with various diseases, as
                           gut microbiota perform various important functions, such as digestion of polysaccharides,
                           vitamin synthesis, and boosting of the immune system [39,40]. There were no significant
                           changes in the alpha diversity of the gut microbiome, but each group showed distinct
                           clusters while analyzing beta diversity (Figure 3B). The group that only received DSS was
                           different compared to the mice that received saffron. An increased abundance of Proteobac-
                           teria has been implicated in a Crohn’s disease and its load has been suggested as a potential
                           criterion in the diagnosis of dysbiosis in gut microbiota [41]. Saffron-treated mice showed
                           depletion in the Proteobacteria phylum. Furthermore, unlike in human IBD, Cyanobacteria,
                           which are reported to increase in DSS-induced colitis [42,43], which is in agreement with
                           our study, were depleted by saffron as observed at the OTU-level analysis (Figure 3C,D).
                           This reduction in colitogenic bacteria (Proteobacteria and Cyanobacteria) is likely to be
                           sensed directly by the immune system, leading to a reduction in pro-inflammatory signals
                           and markers. However, further in-depth studies are warranted to validate these findings.
                           SCFAs, such as butyric acid, acetic acid, and propionic acid, are reported to participate in
                           controlling inflammation and repair the colon epithelium [32]. SCFA levels are known to
                           be reduced in fecal samples of IBD patients and in experimental colitis [44–46]. Saffron pre-
                           served the essential SCFAs in mice feces, indicating its beneficial attributes in maintaining
                           colonic microbial populations during colitis. The cumulative effects of saffron treatment,
                           leading to the positive changes in observed macroscopic, histological, and immune markers,
                           have potential translational implications for patients with intestinal inflammation. In fact,
Molecules 2021, 26, 3351                                                                                           7 of 10




                           based on our previous and the present findings [28], we calculated the human equivalent
                           dose (20 mg/Kg) of saffron that showed the best outcome in DSS-induced colitis mice
                           and started a clinical trial in patients with mild to moderate ulcerative colitis. We have
                           already registered our clinical trial for this application at clinicaltrials.gov (https://www.
                           clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?cond=saffron&term=&cntry=&state=&city=&dist= accessed
                           on 1 June 2021) (NCT04749576).

                           4. Materials and Methods
                           4.1. Mice
                                Age-matched C57BL/6N mice were purchased from Taconic Biosciences (Rensselaer,
                           NY, USA). All experimental animal procedures were in accordance with the guidelines and
                           principles of the Canadian Council of Animal Care and were approved by the Animal Care
                           Committee McMaster University (AUP # 19-02-09).

                           4.2. Pre-Treatment with Saffron and Evaluation of DSS-Induced Colitis
                                Saffron aqueous extract at two different doses (10 mg and 20 mg per kg body weight)
                           were given to the mice (N = 4 mice/group) by oral gavage for four days prior to the
                           administration of DSS (mol wt. 36–54 kilo daltons; ICN Biomedicals Inc., Soho, OH, USA)
                           in their drinking water at 2.5% weight/volume (w/v) along with saffron for 7 more days.
                           The average DSS consumption per cage was recorded every day for the duration of the
                           experiment. Mice were sacrificed on the 7th day after the beginning of DSS administration
                           to examine the severity of colitis using previously published scoring systems. The disease
                           activity index (DAI) was calculated using the scores of body weight loss, bloody feces,
                           and consistency of stool. Macroscopic scoring was done after the mice were sacrificed
                           by careful observation of rectal bleeding, rectal prolapse, colonic bleeding, and diarrhea.
                           Colonic histological damage score was based on goblet cell depletion, the loss of crypt
                           architectures, inflammatory cell infiltration, and crypt abscess.

                           4.3. Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
                                Colon tissues from mice in each group were homogenized in tissue lysis buffer and the
                           supernatant were used to analyze the level of IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α using commercially
                           available ELISA kits from R&D System Inc. (Minneapolis, MN, USA) and expressed in
                           units/mg of protein.
                                The serotonin level in tissue were measured as previously described [26], using
                           commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (Cat. # IM1749;
                           Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA, USA). The serotonin level was expressed as a function of
                           tissue weight (ng/mg).

                           4.4. Western Blot
                                Cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins were extracted by using the NE-PER nuclear and
                           cytoplasmic extraction reagent kit (no. 78833, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)
                           as described earlier [5]. Briefly, the protein concentration in the extract was determined
                           by the DC Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Mississauga, ON, Canada). Protein
                           samples were separated using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
                           and were electrophoretically transferred onto nitrocellulose or polyvinylidene difluoride
                           membranes. The membranes were incubated with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in s 1×
                           Tris-buffered saline Tween 20 at room temperature for 1 h and then probed with primary
                           antibodies overnight at 4 ◦ C. The membranes were then washed 3 times with Tris-buffered
                           saline containing 0.1% Tween 20 followed by incubation with corresponding secondary
                           antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Immunodetection was performed by visualization
                           of the membrane using a chemiluminescent reagent (Thermo Scientific) and by exposure to
                           a luminescent image analyzer, the ChemiDoc Touch Imaging System (Bio-Rad Laboratories,
                           Hercules, CA, USA). NF-κB p65 (1:1000; catalog no. ab16502) and lamin B1 (1:1000; catalog
                           no. ab65986) were purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, MA, USA). β-actin (1:1000; catalog
Molecules 2021, 26, 3351                                                                                              8 of 10




                           no. 4970) was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. (Boston, MA, USA). The
                           rabbit polyclonal antibody was obtained from Abbiotec (San Diego, CA, USA).

                           4.5. Bacterial Diversity and Profiling Analysis of the Cecal Microbiota
                                Bacterial profiling of cecal samples was carried out by amplification of the V3–V4
                           regions of the 16S rRNA gene, as described previously [47,48]. Amplification products were
                           sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq with 2 × 250 nt paired end reads. The OTU abundance
                           table obtained were given as input to Microbiome Analyst using default parameters and
                           rarefying the data to the minimum library size with total sum normalization. The low
                           variance filter was set at 10% using the inter-quartile range, and 20% prevalence was
                           kept with four minimum counts [49]. The Microbiome Analyst platform was used to
                           analyze alpha and beta diversities, and to compare the relative abundance of taxa at the
                           phylum level [49].

                           4.6. Analysis of Fecal Short-Chain Fatty Acid Using Gas Chromatography—Mass Spectrometry
                                The concentrations of SCFAs in feces of mice were determined by gas chromatography–
                           mass spectrometry, as described previously [26]. Briefly, e-tubes in which fecal samples
                           were acidified with a weight equivalent amount of 3.7% hydrochloric acid were soni-
                           cated in methanol for 20 min before use. To the acidified samples, internal standards
                           (14.72 mmol/L butyric acid-d7 ) were added, followed by the addition of diethyl ether to
                           obtain a diethyl ether–fecal extract. The acidified samples were extracted three times with
                           propyl formate containing butyric acid-d7 as the internal standard, and a 60 µL extract
                           aliquot was derivatized with 25 µL MTBSTFA at 40 ◦ C for 1 h and then analyzed by GCMS
                           Then the derivatized samples were run through the 6890N Network GC system (Agilent
                           Technologies, Mississauga, ON, Canada) equipped with DB-17HT (30 m × 0.25 mm ID,
                           0.15 mm film) and 5973N Mass Selective Detector (Agilent Technologies). Acetic acid,
                           propionic acid, isobutyric acid, butyric acid, isovaleric acid, pentanoic acid, and lactic acid
                           were quantified and reported as nmol/mg of fecal sample. The calibration curves were
                           obtained for all seven targets by injecting all the standards as a mixture.

                           4.7. Statistical Analysis
                                Student’s t-test or one-way ANOVA in GraphPad Prism ver. 9.0 (San Diego, CA, USA)
                           was used to determine the significance of the intergroup differences. Data are expressed as
                           the mean ± SEM. p values of less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

                           5. Conclusions
                                Our data suggest that saffron exhibits its prophylactic effect on DSS-induced colitis
                           in mice by reducing the serotonin levels, inhibiting pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion,
                           and maintaining the diversity of the gut microbiota and the SCFA level. Our pre-clinical
                           study provides an alternative and safe approach to reduce the susceptibility to GI disorders,
                           including IBD, by incorporating saffron, a natural and edible product, into diets. However,
                           a well-designed clinical trial may shed some light on the efficacy of saffron in different GI
                           disorders, such as IBD.

                           Author Contributions: S.B., H.A. and W.I.K. conceived and designed the research; S.B., Y.H.K. and
                           H.W. performed the experiments; S.B., Y.H.K. and W.I.K. analyzed and interpreted the results of
                           the experiments; S.B. and W.I.K. drafted the manuscript; S.B., H.B., H.A., G.S., S.R.S. and W.I.K.
                           edited and revised the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
                           the manuscript.
                           Funding: This work was supported by grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
                           (PJT156262). S.B. is supported by Post-Doctoral Fellowship Award from Canadian Institutes of
                           Health Research.
                           Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Animal experiment approval number has
                           been added above in method section.
Molecules 2021, 26, 3351                                                                                                             9 of 10




                                   Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
                                   corresponding author.
                                   Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Michael Surette and his laboratory for the support in the
                                   microbiota work. We also thank all saffron growers and gp-food.com (http://www.gp-food.com/
                                   index.php/about-us.html) (accessed on 1 June 2021) for providing saffron.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
                                   Sample Availability: Samples are available from the authors.

References
1.    Jairath, V.; Feagan, B.G. Global burden of inflammatory bowel disease. Lancet Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2020, 5, 2–3. [CrossRef]
2.    Ananthakrishnan, A.N. Epidemiology and risk factors for IBD. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2015, 12, 205–217. [CrossRef]
3.    Li, P.; Zheng, Y.; Chen, X. Drugs for autoimmune inflammatory diseases: From small molecule compounds to anti-TNF biologics.
      Front. Pharmacol. 2017, 8, 460. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.    Manuc, T.E.; Manuc, M.M.; Diculescu, M.M. Recent insights into the molecular pathogenesis of Crohn’s disease: A review of
      emerging therapeutic targets. Clin. Exp. Gastroenterol. 2016, 9, 59. [PubMed]
5.    Banskota, S.; Wang, H.; Kwon, Y.H.; Gautam, J.; Gurung, P.; Haq, S.; Hassan, F.N.; Bowdish, D.M.; Kim, J.A.; Carling, D.;
      et al. Salicylates Ameliorate Intestinal Inflammation by Activating Macrophage AMPK. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2021, 27, 914–926.
      [CrossRef]
6.    Yanai, H.; Hanauer, S.B. Assessing response and loss of response to biological therapies in IBD. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2011, 106,
      685–698. [CrossRef]
7.    Biancone, L.; Armuzzi, A.; Scribano, M.L.; Castiglione, F.; D’incà, R.; Orlando, A.; Papi, C.; Daperno, M.; Vecchi, M.; Riegler,
      G.; et al. Cancer Risk in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A 6-Year Prospective Multicenter Nested Case–Control. IG-IBD Study.
      Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2020, 26, 450–459. [CrossRef]
8.    Jawad, N.; Direkze, N.; Leedham, S.J. Inflammatory bowel disease and colon cancer. In Inflammation and Gastrointestinal Cancers;
      Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2011; pp. 99–115.
9.    Munkholm, P. The incidence and prevalence of colorectal cancer in inflammatory bowel disease. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2003,
      18, 1–5. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.   Isbell, G.; Levin, B. Ulcerative colitis and colon cancer. Gastroenterol. Clin. N. Am. 1988, 17, 773–791. [CrossRef]
11.   Guo, B.J.; Bian, Z.X.; Qiu, H.C.; Wang, Y.T.; Wang, Y. Biological and clinical implications of herbal medicine and natural products
      for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2017, 1401, 37–48. [CrossRef]
12.   Serrano-Díaz, J.; Sánchez, A.M.; Martínez-Tomé, M.; Winterhalter, P.; Alonso, G.L. A contribution to nutritional studies on Crocus
      sativus flowers and their value as food. J. Food Compos. Anal. 2013, 31, 101–108. [CrossRef]
13.   Alavizadeh, S.H.; Hosseinzadeh, H. Bioactivity assessment and toxicity of crocin: A comprehensive review. Food Chem. Toxicol.
      2014, 64, 65–80. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Khorasany, A.R.; Hosseinzadeh, H. Therapeutic effects of saffron (Crocus sativus L.) in digestive disorders: A review. Iran. J. Basic
      Med. Sci. 2016, 19, 455.
15.   Ashktorab, H.; Soleimani, A.; Singh, G.; Amin, A.; Tabtabaei, S.; Latella, G.; Stein, U.; Akhondzadeh, S.; Solanki, N.; Gondré-Lewis,
      M.C.; et al. Saffron: The golden spice with therapeutic properties on digestive diseases. Nutrients 2019, 11, 943. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.   Verma, S.; Bordia, A. Antioxidant property of saffron in man. Indian J. Med. Sci. 1998, 52, 205–207.
17.   Teng, S.; Hao, J.; Bi, H.; Li, C.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Han, W.; Wang, D. The protection of crocin against ulcerative colitis and
      colorectal cancer via suppression of NF-κB-mediated inflammation. Front. Pharmacol. 2021, 12, 639458. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.   Banskota, S.; Regmi, S.C.; Kim, J.-A. NOX1 to NOX2 switch deactivates AMPK and induces invasive phenotype in colon cancer
      cells through overexpression of MMP-7. Mol. Cancer 2015, 14, 123. [CrossRef]
19.   Tak, P.P.; Firestein, G.S. NF-κB: A key role in inflammatory diseases. J. Clin. Investig. 2001, 107, 7–11. [CrossRef]
20.   Khan, W.I.; Motomura, Y.; Wang, H.; El-Sharkawy, R.T.; Verdu, E.F.; Verma-Gandhu, M.; Rollins, B.J.; Collins, S.M. Critical role of
      MCP-1 in the pathogenesis of experimental colitis in the context of immune and enterochromaffin cells. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest.
      Liver Physiol. 2006, 291, G803–G811. [CrossRef]
21.   Manocha, M.; Khan, W.I. Serotonin and GI disorders: An update on clinical and experimental studies. Clin. Transl. Gastroenterol.
      2012, 3, e13. [CrossRef]
22.   Ghia, J.E.; Li, N.; Wang, H.; Collins, M.; Deng, Y.; El–Sharkawy, R.T.; Côté, F.; Mallet, J.; Khan, W.I. Serotonin has a key role in
      pathogenesis of experimental colitis. Gastroenterology 2009, 137, 1649–1660. [CrossRef]
23.   Regmi, S.C.; Park, S.Y.; Ku, S.K.; Kim, J.A. Serotonin regulates innate immune responses of colon epithelial cells through
      Nox2-derived reactive oxygen species. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2014, 69, 377–389. [CrossRef]
24.   Banskota, S.; Gautam, J.; Regmi, S.C.; Gurung, P.; Park, M.H.; Kim, S.J.; Nam, T.G.; Jeong, B.S.; Kim, J.A. BJ-1108, a 6-Amino-2,
      4, 5-Trimethylpyridin-3-ol analog, inhibits serotonin-induced angiogenesis and tumor growth through PI3K/NOX Pathway.
      PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0148133. [CrossRef]
Molecules 2021, 26, 3351                                                                                                                   10 of 10




25.   Banskota, S.; Ghia, J.E.; Khan, W.I. Serotonin in the gut: Blessing or a curse. Biochimie 2019, 161, 56–64. [CrossRef]
26.   Kwon, Y.H.; Wang, H.; Denou, E.; Ghia, J.E.; Rossi, L.; Fontes, M.E.; Bernier, S.P.; Shajib, M.S.; Banskota, S.; Collins, S.M.; et al.
      Modulation of gut microbiota composition by serotonin signaling influences intestinal immune response and susceptibility to
      colitis. Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2019, 7, 709–728. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.   Hill, D.A.; Artis, D. Intestinal bacteria and the regulation of immune cell homeostasis. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2009, 28, 623–667.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.   Singh, G.; Haileselassie, Y.; Brim, H.; Ashktorab, H.; Habtezion, A. Tu1284 Protective Effect of Saffron in Mouse Colitis Models
      through Immune Modulation. Gastroenterology 2020, 158, S-1043. [CrossRef]
29.   Striz, I.; Brabcova, E.; Kolesar, L.; Sekerkova, A. Cytokine networking of innate immunity cells: A potential target of therapy.
      Clin. Sci. 2014, 126, 593–612. [CrossRef]
30.   Coombes, J.; Powrie, F. Dendritic cells in intestinal immune regulation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2008, 8, 435–446. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.   Osbelt, L.; Thiemann, S.; Smit, N.; Lesker, T.R.; Schröter, M.; Gálvez, E.J.; Schmidt-Hohagen, K.; Pils, M.C.; Mühlen, S.; Dersch, P.;
      et al. Variations in microbiota composition of laboratory mice influence Citrobacter rodentium infection via variable short-chain
      fatty acid production. PLoS Pathog. 2020, 16, e1008448. [CrossRef]
32.   Parada Venegas, D.; De la Fuente, M.K.; Landskron, G.; González, M.J.; Quera, R.; Dijkstra, G.; Harmsen, H.J.; Faber, K.N.;
      Hermoso, M.A. Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs)-mediated gut epithelial and immune regulation and its relevance for inflammatory
      bowel diseases. Front. Immunol. 2019, 10, 277. [CrossRef]
33.   Tahvilian, N.; Masoodi, M.; Faghihi Kashani, A.; Vafa, M.; Aryaeian, N.; Heydarian, A.; Hosseini, A.; Moradi, N.; Farsi, F. Effects
      of saffron supplementation on oxidative/antioxidant status and severity of disease in ulcerative colitis patients: A randomized,
      double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Phytother. Res. 2021, 35, 946–953. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.   Cerdá-Bernad, D.; Valero-Cases, E.; Pastor, J.J.; Frutos, M.J. Saffron bioactives crocin, crocetin and safranal: Effect on oxidative
      stress and mechanisms of action. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2020, 1–18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.   Kawabata, K.; Tung, N.H.; Shoyama, Y.; Sugie, S.; Mori, T.; Tanaka, T. Dietary crocin inhibits colitis and colitis-associated colorectal
      carcinogenesis in male ICR mice. Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2012, 2012, 820415. [CrossRef]
36.   Khodir, A.E.; Said, E.; Atif, H.; ElKashef, H.A.; Salem, H.A. Targeting Nrf2/HO-1 signaling by crocin: Role in attenuation of
      AA-induced ulcerative colitis in rats. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2019, 110, 389–399. [CrossRef]
37.   Lertnimitphun, P.; Jiang, Y.; Kim, N.; Fu, W.; Zheng, C.; Tan, H.; Zhou, H.; Zhang, X.; Pei, W.; Lu, Y.; et al. Safranal alleviates
      dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis and suppresses macrophage-mediated inflammation. Front. Pharmacol. 2019, 10, 1281.
      [CrossRef]
38.   Banskota, S.; Regmi, S.C.; Gautam, J.; Gurung, P.; Lee, Y.J.; Ku, S.K.; Lee, J.H.; Lee, J.; Chang, H.W.; Park, S.J.; et al. Serotonin
      disturbs colon epithelial tolerance of commensal E. coli by increasing NOX2-derived superoxide. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2017, 106,
      196–207. [CrossRef]
39.   Campieri, M.; Gionchetti, P. Bacteria as the cause of ulcerative colitis. Gut 2001, 48, 132–135. [CrossRef]
40.   Sekirov, I.; Russell, S.L.; Antunes, L.C. Finlay BB Gut microbiota in health and disease. Physiol. Rev. 2010, 90, 859–904. [CrossRef]
41.   Vester-Andersen, M.K.; Mirsepasi-Lauridsen, H.C.; Prosberg, M.V.; Mortensen, C.O.; Träger, C.; Skovsen, K.; Thorkilgaard, T.;
      Nøjgaard, C.; Vind, I.; Krogfelt, K.A.; et al. Increased abundance of proteobacteria in aggressive Crohn’s disease seven years after
      diagnosis. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 1–10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.   Wang, J.; Zhu, G.; Sun, C.; Xiong, K.; Yao, T.; Su, Y.; Fang, H. TAK-242 ameliorates DSS-induced colitis by regulating the gut
      microbiota and the JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway. Microb. Cell Factories 2020, 19, 1–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.   Santoru, M.L.; Piras, C.; Murgia, A.; Palmas, V.; Camboni, T.; Liggi, S.; Ibba, I.; Lai, M.A.; Orrù, S.; Blois, S.; et al. Cross sectional
      evaluation of the gut-microbiome metabolome axis in an Italian cohort of IBD patients. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 1–14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.   Huda-Faujan, N.; Abdulamir, A.S.; Fatimah, A.B.; Anas, O.M.; Shuhaimi, M.; Yazid, A.M.; Loong, Y.Y. The impact of the level of
      the intestinal short chain fatty acids in inflammatory bowel disease patients versus healthy subjects. Open Biochem. J. 2010, 4, 53.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.   Machiels, K.; Joossens, M.; Sabino, J.; De Preter, V.; Arijs, I.; Eeckhaut, V.; Ballet, V.; Claes, K.; Van Immerseel, F.; Verbeke, K.; et al.
      A decrease of the butyrate-producing species Roseburia hominis and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii defines dysbiosis in patients
      with ulcerative colitis. Gut 2014, 63, 1275–1283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.   Zhou, Y.; Xu, H.; Xu, J.; Guo, X.; Zhao, H.; Chen, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Nie, Y. F. prausnitzii and its supernatant increase SCFAs-producing
      bacteria to restore gut dysbiosis in TNBS-induced colitis. AMB Express 2021, 11, 1–10. [CrossRef]
47.   Bartram, A.K.; Lynch, M.D.; Stearns, J.C.; Moreno-Hagelsieb, G.; Neufeld, J.D. Generation of multimillion-sequence 16S rRNA
      gene libraries from complex microbial communities by assembling paired-end Illumina reads. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2011, 77,
      3846–3852. [CrossRef]
48.   Stearns, J.C.; Davidson, C.J.; McKeon, S.; Whelan, F.J.; Fontes, M.E.; Schryvers, A.B.; Bowdish, D.M.; Kellner, J.D.; Surette, M.G.
      Culture and molecular-based profiles show shifts in bacterial communities of the upper respiratory tract that occur with age.
      ISME J. 2015, 9, 1246–1259. [CrossRef]
49.   Chong, J.; Liu, P.; Zhou, G.; Xia, J. Using MicrobiomeAnalyst for comprehensive statistical, functional, and meta-analysis of
      microbiome data. Nat. Protoc. 2020, 15, 799–821. [CrossRef]
