              microorganisms

Article
Differences in the On- and Off-Tumor Microbiota between
Right- and Left-Sided Colorectal Cancer
Oliver Phipps 1 , Mohammed N. Quraishi 2,3,4 , Edward A. Dickson 5,6 , Helen Steed 1,7 , Aditi Kumar 1,7 ,
Austin G. Acheson 5,6 , Andrew D. Beggs 2,4 , Matthew J. Brookes 1,7 and Hafid Omar Al-Hassi 1, *

                                          1   Research Institute in Healthcare Science, Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Wolverhampton,
                                              Wolverhampton WV1 1LY, UK; o.phipps@wlv.ac.uk (O.P.); helen.steed@nhs.net (H.S.);
                                              aditikumar@nhs.net (A.K.); matthew.brookes@nhs.net (M.J.B.)
                                          2   Surgical Research Laboratory, Institute of Cancer & Genomic Science, University of Birmingham,
                                              Birmingham B15 2TQ, UK; M.N.Quraishi@bham.ac.uk (M.N.Q.); a.beggs@bham.ac.uk (A.D.B.)
                                          3   Microbiome Treatment Centre, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK
                                          4   Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust,
                                              Birmingham B15 2TH, UK
                                          5   NIHR Biomedical Research Centre in Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases, Nottingham University Hospitals
                                              NHS Trust, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK; edward.dickson1@nottingham.ac.uk (E.A.D.);
                                              austin.acheson@nottingham.ac.uk (A.G.A.)
                                          6   Department of Colorectal Surgery, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham NG5 1PB, UK
                                          7   Department of Gastroenterology, Royal Wolverhampton Hospitals NHS Trust,
                                              Wolverhampton WV10 0QP, UK
                                          *   Correspondence: H.Omar6@wlv.ac.uk
         
         
                                          Abstract: This study aims to determine differences in the on- and off-tumor microbiota between pa-
Citation: Phipps, O.; Quraishi, M.N.;     tients with right- and left-sided colorectal cancer. Microbiome profiling of tumor and tumor-adjacent
Dickson, E.A.; Steed, H.; Kumar, A.;      biopsies from patients with right-sided (n = 17) and left-sided (n = 7) colorectal adenocarcinoma was
Acheson, A.G.; Beggs, A.D.; Brookes,      performed using 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing. Off-tumor alpha and beta diversity were signif-
M.J.; Al-Hassi, H.O. Differences in the
                                          icantly different between right- and left-sided colorectal cancer patients. However, no differences
On- and Off-Tumor Microbiota
                                          in on-tumor diversity were observed between tumor locations. Comparing the off-tumor micro-
between Right- and Left-Sided
                                          biota showed the right colon to be enriched with species of the Lachnoclostridium, Selenomonas,
Colorectal Cancer. Microorganisms
                                          and Ruminococcus genera. Whereas the left colon is enriched with Epsilonbacteraeota phylum,
2021, 9, 1108. https://doi.org/
10.3390/microorganisms9051108
                                          Campylobacteria class, and Pasteurellales and Campylobacterales orders, in contrast, the on-tumor
                                          microbiota showed relatively fewer differences in bacterial taxonomy between tumor sites, with
Academic Editor: Francesco Di Pierro      left tumors being enriched with Methylophilaceae and Vadin BE97 families and Alloprevotella,
                                          Intestinibacter, Romboutsia, and Ruminococcus 2 genera. Patients with left-sided colorectal cancer
Received: 5 May 2021                      had large taxonomic differences between their paired on- and off-tumor microbiota, while patients
Accepted: 19 May 2021                     with right-sided colorectal cancer showed relatively fewer taxonomic differences. Collectively, this
Published: 20 May 2021                    suggests that the right and left colon show distinctive bacterial populations; however, the presence of
                                          a colonic tumor leads to a more consistent microbiota between locations.
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in   Keywords: right- and left-sided colorectal cancer; gut microbiome; 16S rRNA; tumor microbiota;
published maps and institutional affil-
                                          proximal and distal colon
iations.




                                          1. Introduction
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                                               The term colorectal cancer encompasses a heterogeneous group of tumors of the lower
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          gastrointestinal tract. Cancer location can be defined in relation to the colonic splenic
This article is an open access article
                                          flexure (Figure 1), with tumors of the caecum, ascending and transverse colon, termed
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                          right-sided colorectal cancer, and tumors of the descending colon, sigmoid colon, and the
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                          rectum, termed left-sided colorectal cancer [1,2]. The right and left colon have distinctive
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                          embryological origins, developing from the midgut and hindgut, respectively [3]. These
4.0/).                                    two anatomical colonic locations are supplied by different blood supplies, with the right




Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1108. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms9051108                          https://www.mdpi.com/journal/microorganisms
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1108                                                                                                         2 of 11
 Microorganisms 2021, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                            3 of 12


                                  colon being supplied by the superior mesenteric artery and the left colon being supplied
                                  by the inferior mesenteric artery [3,4].




     Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the right and left colon in relation to the colonic splenic flexure. The right colon (green)
      Figure of
     consists 1. the caecum,diagram
                 Schematic   ascending, andright
                                    of the   transverse
                                                 and leftcolon
                                                          colonand the left colon
                                                                in relation  to the(red) consists
                                                                                    colonic       of the
                                                                                            splenic      descending
                                                                                                     flexure.        colon,
                                                                                                              The right     sigmoid
                                                                                                                        colon  (green)
     colon, and  rectum.
      consists of the caecum, ascending, and transverse colon and the left colon (red) consists of the descending colon, sigmoid
      colon, and rectum.
                                        Disparities between the right and left colon translate into observable differences in
                                  molecular   and studies
                                         Previous  clinical have
                                                            characteristics
                                                                  attemptedbetween       tumors
                                                                                to determine       in these locations.
                                                                                                 differences    in the gutThese     include
                                                                                                                             microbiota   be-
                                  right-sided  tumors  more   commonly     associated    with   microsatellite   instability,
                                   tween right- and left-sided colorectal cancer [10,11]. Flemer et al. (2017) showed that     being  highly
                                                                                                                                        there
                                  immunogenic,    and presenting
                                   was no observable                 with BRAF
                                                        difference between     the mutations.     Whereas,
                                                                                   on- and off-tumor          left-sidedalong
                                                                                                          microbiota,      tumorswithpresent
                                                                                                                                       show-
                                  with  chromosomal    instability, often showing      mutations   in APC,    P53,  and  SMAD4,
                                   ing that the on-tumor microbiota from the right and left colon were significantly different       and are
                                  associated  with amplified   epidermal   growth    factor  receptor  signaling    [5]. These
                                   [10]. However, as subsequently discussed by Al-Hassi et al. (2018), patients with right-      differences
                                  may
                                   sidedbecolorectal
                                           accountable   for the
                                                     tumors      variability
                                                               more  commonly in cancer
                                                                                   develop incidence   and prognosis
                                                                                              iron deficiency     anemiabetween       tumor
                                                                                                                            relative to those
                                  locations. With right-sided tumor patients tending to have a lower incidence with more
                                   with left-sided tumors, hence more often requiring iron therapy [12]. Enteral iron supple-
                                  advanced tumors and worse prognosis, compared to the left-sided tumor. Furthermore,
                                   mentation, often given to treat anemia, has been shown to alter the colonic microbiota,
                                  right-sided tumors are more common in older females, whereas left-sided tumors are more
                                   potentially through increasing gut luminal iron availability for bacterial cell proliferation
                                  frequent in younger males [1,5]. With right- and left-sided colorectal tumors presenting
                                   [13]. The occurrence of iron deficiency anemia and the use of enteral iron supplementation
                                  with such differences, further understanding the biological mechanisms underpinning
                                   was not assessed by the authors in the Flemer study and has the possibility to be account-
                                  cancer initiation and progression, and how these differ between the right and left colon,
                                   able for differences observed [10]. Therefore, when assessing the gut microbiota in colo-
                                  can aid in disease prevention and treatment.
                                   rectal cancer, ensuring consistency in the prevalence of iron deficiency anemia and iron
                                        A multistep pathogenesis is involved in the etiology of sporadic colorectal tumors,
                                   therapy is essential [14,15].
                                  with genetics, lifestyle, and environment all known to contribute to colorectal carcinogene-
                                         To our knowledge, this pilot study is the first to assess both the tumor-associated and
                                  sis [6]. Along with this, the gut bacterial microbiota and their metabolites have also been
                                   tumor-adjacent    microbiota
                                  shown to both promote           between
                                                             and protect    right-colorectal
                                                                          against    and left-sided   colorectal
                                                                                                 cancer             canceridentifying
                                                                                                         [7]. Therefore,     patients, while
                                                                                                                                         the
                                  bacterial populations in the tumor-associated (on-tumor) and tumor-adjacent therapy.
                                   ensuring   consistency   in the  prevalence    of  iron  deficiency   anemia     and   iron            All
                                                                                                                                (off-tumor)
                                   colorectal cancer patients included in this study had iron deficiency anemia and received
                                   parenteral iron therapy prior to surgery. Parenteral iron therapy was given in order to
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1108                                                                                          3 of 11



                               microbiota, and how they differ between the right and left colon, has the potential to be
                               beneficial in predicting disease outcomes and aid in patient stratification [8,9].
                                    Previous studies have attempted to determine differences in the gut microbiota be-
                               tween right- and left-sided colorectal cancer [10,11]. Flemer et al. (2017) showed that
                               there was no observable difference between the on- and off-tumor microbiota, along with
                               showing that the on-tumor microbiota from the right and left colon were significantly
                               different [10]. However, as subsequently discussed by Al-Hassi et al. (2018), patients with
                               right-sided colorectal tumors more commonly develop iron deficiency anemia relative
                               to those with left-sided tumors, hence more often requiring iron therapy [12]. Enteral
                               iron supplementation, often given to treat anemia, has been shown to alter the colonic
                               microbiota, potentially through increasing gut luminal iron availability for bacterial cell
                               proliferation [13]. The occurrence of iron deficiency anemia and the use of enteral iron sup-
                               plementation was not assessed by the authors in the Flemer study and has the possibility to
                               be accountable for differences observed [10]. Therefore, when assessing the gut microbiota
                               in colorectal cancer, ensuring consistency in the prevalence of iron deficiency anemia and
                               iron therapy is essential [14,15].
                                    To our knowledge, this pilot study is the first to assess both the tumor-associated and
                               tumor-adjacent microbiota between right- and left-sided colorectal cancer patients, while
                               ensuring consistency in the prevalence of iron deficiency anemia and iron therapy. All
                               colorectal cancer patients included in this study had iron deficiency anemia and received
                               parenteral iron therapy prior to surgery. Parenteral iron therapy was given in order to limit
                               the influence of increasing gut iron concentration on the gut microbiota, associated with
                               enteral iron therapy [13,16].

                               2. Materials and Methods
                               2.1. Study Population and Sample Collection
                                    Twenty-four anemic patients with non-metastatic histologically proven colorectal
                               adenocarcinoma, presenting with right-sided (n = 17) and left-sided (n = 7) tumors, from the
                               intravenous iron in colorectal cancer associated anemia (IVICA) trial, were included in the
                               study. All patients selected for this study received intravenous iron (ferric carboxymaltose—
                               Ferinject ™; Vifor Pharma, Glattbrugg, Switzerland) prior to surgery, dosed by weight and
                               hemoglobin in accordance with the summary of product characteristics [17]. Treatment was
                               administered at least 14 days preoperatively, with any pre-existing oral iron supplements
                               being discontinued at this point. Anemia was defined as having a hemoglobin level at least
                               10 g/L below the sex-specific World Health Organization definition (women ≤ 120 g/L,
                               men ≤ 130 g/L). Patients were excluded from the study if they were currently receiving
                               chemotherapeutic treatment, had anemia prior to colorectal cancer diagnosis, or pre-
                               existing hematological disease. Detailed patient demographics can be found in Table 1.
                               Colorectal tumor biopsies and paired tumor-adjacent colonic mucosal tissue biopsies were
                               obtained post-surgery.

                               2.2. DNA Extraction and 16S Ribosomal RNA Amplicon Sequencing
                                    Bacterial DNA was obtained using a modified protocol of Qiagen All Prep DNA/RNA
                               Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Colorectal tumor and paired tumor-adjacent biopsies
                               were mechanically lysed using 5 mm steel bead (Qiagen) and 0.1 mm Zirconia/Silica beads
                               (Strateck, Suffolk, UK) with a TissueLyser (Qiagen), followed by enzymatic and heat lysis.
                               Extracted microbial DNA was used for 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene amplification
                               and sequencing to determine the mucosal-adherent microbiota according to the Earth
                               Microbiome project protocol [18]. Using primers targeted to the V4 region (515F-806R),
                               the 16S rRNA genes were amplified in technical triplicates. This was performed using
                               a single-step, single-indexed polymerase chain reaction (PCR). DNA extraction and 16S
                               rRNA gene PCR were both performed in batch with appropriate multiple-reagent based
                               negative controls. Paired-end sequencing (2 × 250 base pairs) was completed in a single
                               batch using the Illumina MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA).
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1108                                                                                             4 of 11



     Table 1. Patient cohort demographics. Categorical variables are presented with percentages. Continuous variables are
     presented as mean value [standard deviation] or * median value [interquartile range]. Hb, hemoglobin. CR-POSSUM,
     ColoRectal Physiological and Operative Severity Score for the enumeration of Mortality and morbidity. ASA, American
     Society of Anesthesiologist.

           Patient Characteristics            Right-Sided Colorectal Cancer (n = 17)    Left-Sided Colorectal Cancer (n = 7)
 Age                                                           75.3 [7.5]                              74 [7.7]
 Male                                                           9 (53%)                               7 (100%)
 Female                                                         8 (47%)                                0 (0%)
 Height, m                                                    1.67 [0.08]                            1.77 [0.08]
 Weight, kg                                                   75.6 [12.8]                            88.5 [24.0]
 Inclusion Hb, g/L                                            97.1 [14.1]                           102.9 [10.0]
 Recruitment ferritin, µg/L *                                 25 [15–55]                              10 [8–49]
 Recruitment transferrin saturation, % *                     2.6 [2.3–3.6]                          2.8 [2.6–3.3]
 Duration of iron treatment, days *                           21 [15–35]                             28 [15–43]
 Tumor Stage
   T≤2                                                         1 (6%)                                 0 (0%)
   T3                                                          3 (18%)                                5 (71%)
   T4                                                         13 (76%)                                2 (29%)
 Preoperative Risk Assessment
   ASA fitness status classification
      I–II                                                     7 (41%)                                2 (29%)
      III–IV                                                   10 (59%)                               5 (71%)
   CR-POSSUM mortality score, % *                            3.5 [2.5–9.3]                          3.5 [2.6–6.6]


                                 2.3. Statistical Analysis
                                       Microbial bioinformatic analysis was achieved using the Quantitative Insight Into
                                 Microbial Ecology 2 (QIIME2) pipeline [19]. High-quality reads were clustered into op-
                                 erational taxonomic units (OTUs), reads with a 99% sequence identity were allocated
                                 to a single OTU and were assigned bacterial taxonomy using the Silva-132-99% OTU
                                 database [20]. Alpha diversity was assessed using the Mann–Whitney U test comparing
                                 variation in Abundance-based Coverage Estimator (ACE), Chao1, and observed OTUs
                                 between groups. Beta diversity was assessed using permutational multivariate analysis of
                                 variance (PERMANOVA) comparing Jaccard similarity coefficients, with distances between
                                 groups plotted using principal coordinate analysis (PCoA). PCoA and alpha diversity met-
                                 rics were mapped using the R package “ggplot2” [21]. Comparisons of relative abundances
                                 of taxa between locations and sample types were assessed using a linear discriminant anal-
                                 ysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe). LEfSe uses a non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis rank-sum test
                                 to identify taxa with significantly different normalized relative abundances and performs
                                 an LDA to determine an effect size of each taxon. Taxa with an LDA greater than 2 with a
                                 p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered significant [22].

                                 3. Results
                                 3.1. On- and Off-Tumor Bacterial Diversity between the Right and Left Colon
                                      A total of 4.4 million reads (an average of 109,122 reads/sample) were obtained fol-
                                 lowing quality control, a sampling depth of 8000 reads/sample was chosen following
                                 rarefaction. Comparison of alpha diversity metrics shows that the off-tumor microbiota
                                 of patients with right-sided colorectal cancer showed significantly greater ACE (Bacterial
                                 Abundance), Observed OTUs (Species Richness), and Chao1 (Bacterial Diversity), com-
                                 pared to left-sided colorectal cancer patients (Figure 2; p < 0.05). Consistent with this, the
                                 Jaccard similarity assessed beta diversity, showing that the off-tumor microbiota of right-
                                 and left-sided colorectal cancer patients formed significantly distinct bacterial community
                                 clusters (Figure 3a; p = 0.003). In contrast, the on-tumor microbiota showed no differences
                                 in alpha diversity between right- and left-sided colorectal cancer patients (Figure 2; ns).
                                 Furthermore, no significant differences in beta diversity were observed between right-
                                 and left-sided colorectal tumors (Figure 3b; ns). Collectively this suggests that bacterial
     Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1108                                                                                                                     5 of 11
Microorganisms 2021, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                       6 of 12
     Microorganisms 2021, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                  6 of 12
                                           diversity is greater in the right colon compared to the left; however, the presence of a
                                           colonic tumor leads to a more consistent bacterial diversity between locations.
    (a)                                                (b)                                                  (c)
          (a)      *                  ns                  (b)        **                  ns                  (c)          *                  ns

                         *                 ns                             **                  ns                              *               ns




     Figure  2. On-
           Figure     and
                   2. On-  off-tumor
                      On-and            alpha
                                off-tumor
                           andoff-tumor          diversity
                                              alpha           between
                                                      diversity  between  right  and leftleft
                                                                              right         colon.  Alpha  diversity  metrics   (a) Abundance-based
           Figure 2.                        alpha   diversity  between     right andand        colon.
                                                                                      left colon.     Alpha
                                                                                                  Alpha      diversity
                                                                                                         diversity         (a) (a)
                                                                                                                       metrics
                                                                                                                   metrics          Abundance-based
                                                                                                                              Abundance-based
     coverage   estimate
           coverage        (ACE),
                      estimate      (b)
                                (ACE),   Observed
                                         (b)   Observed operational
                                                            operationaltaxonomic
                                                                            taxonomicunits   (OTUs),
                                                                                         units  (OTUs),and
                                                                                                         and(c) Chao1
                                                                                                              (c) Chao1were
                                                                                                                        were  significantly
                                                                                                                               significantly greater
                                                                                                                                             greater in
                                                                                                                                                     in
           coverage estimate (ACE), (b) Observed operational taxonomic units (OTUs), and (c) Chao1 were significantly greater                   in
     the right
           the  compared    to
               right compared  the  left
                      comparedtotothe    off-tumor
                                               off-tumor
                                          leftoff-tumor
                                     theleft             microbiota.
                                                             microbiota.On-tumor
                                                                             On-tumoralpha
                                                                                         alphadiversity  metrics
                                                                                                 diversity metricsshowed
                                                                                                                   showed  no  significant
                                                                                                                            no significant  differences
                                                                                                                                            differences
           the right                                      microbiota.    On-tumor    alpha   diversity metrics showed  no significant differences
     between   tumor
           between      locations.
                     tumor         (* p ≤(*0.05,
                             locations.            **p ≤**p
                                            p ≤ 0.05,     0.01, ns pns> p0.05).
                                                            ≤ 0.01,       > 0.05).
           between tumor locations. (* p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, ns p > 0.05).


        (a) (a)                                                                (b)
                                                                                 (b)
                  p=0.003
                      p=0.003                                                          ns ns




          Figure 3. On- and off-tumor beta diversity between right and left colon. Principle coordinate analysis (PCoA) plots based
          Figure
     Figure
          on 3. On-
              Jaccard On-
                   3. and  and off-tumor
                           off-tumor
                        distances   showbetabeta  diversitydistinct
                                               diversity
                                           significantly    betweenright
                                                           between    right and
                                                                            and left
                                                                    bacterial     leftcolon.
                                                                              community       Principle
                                                                                                Principle
                                                                                        colon.clusters   (pcoordinate
                                                                                                              coordinate
                                                                                                             = 0.003)   analysis  (PCoA)
                                                                                                                           analysis
                                                                                                                      between    the       plots plots
                                                                                                                                       (PCoA)
                                                                                                                                      off-tumor  based  based
                                                                                                                                                  microbiota
          on  Jaccard
     on Jaccard
          from the     distances
                  distances  show
                      right and   show   significantly
                                      significantly
                                  left colon            distinct
                                               (a). On-tumor     bacterial
                                                      distinct bacterial   community
                                                                           community
                                                                microbiota from           clusters
                                                                                           clusters
                                                                                     the right      (p
                                                                                                 and (p=  0.003)  between
                                                                                                             0.003)show
                                                                                                       left= colon  between the off-tumor
                                                                                                                           no the           microbiota
                                                                                                                                     off-tumor
                                                                                                                               significant       microbiota
                                                                                                                                            differences   (ns)
          from the
     from (b).
           the         andand
                rightright  leftleft colon
                                 colon      (a).On-tumor
                                         (a).    On-tumor microbiota
                                                            microbiotafrom
                                                                         from thethe
                                                                                   right  andand
                                                                                       right        coloncolon
                                                                                               left left    show no   significant
                                                                                                                  show no          differences (ns)
                                                                                                                              significant           (b). (ns)
                                                                                                                                            differences
     (b).
                                          3.2. Gut Phylogenetic Profiles between Right- and Left-Sided Colorectal Cancer Patients
                                           3.2. Gut Phylogenetic Profiles between Right- and Left-Sided Colorectal Cancer Patients
                                       3.2. GutFirmicutes,
                                                 PhylogeneticBacteroides,  Proteobacteria,
                                                                 Profiles between
                                                 Firmicutes, Bacteroides,
                                                                                                 Fusobacteria
                                                                                            andLeft-Sided
                                                                                    Right- and
                                                                              Proteobacteria,
                                                                                                                constitute
                                                                                                            Colorectal
                                                                                                and Fusobacteria
                                                                                                                              >95%Patients
                                                                                                                          Cancer
                                                                                                                      constitute
                                                                                                                                     of bacteria
                                                                                                                                    >95% of bacteria
                                          phyla in each group, showing largely consistent phylum relative abundance between
                                           phyla
                                          locationsin (Figure
                                                       each group,
                                             Firmicutes,             showing
                                                            Bacteroides,
                                                               4a). The  3 mostlargely  consistent
                                                                           Proteobacteria,
                                                                                  dominant    and phylum
                                                                                                   Fusobacteria
                                                                                             bacterial         relative
                                                                                                         families         abundance
                                                                                                                     constitute
                                                                                                                    cross                between
                                                                                                                                    >95% of
                                                                                                                            all locations           lo-
                                                                                                                                              bacteria
                                                                                                                                           were
                                           cations
                                       phyla  in     (Figure
                                                  each        4a). The
                                                         group,
                                          Lachnospiraceae,              3 most
                                                                  showing
                                                             Ruminococcaceae,   dominant
                                                                             largely
                                                                                and         bacterial
                                                                                      consistent        families
                                                                                                   phylum
                                                                                      Bacteroidaceae.         relative
                                                                                                       However,  across
                                                                                                                   there isall
                                                                                                                         abundance           the Lach-
                                                                                                                                           were
                                                                                                                                locations in
                                                                                                                               variation between    lo-
                                           nospiraceae,
                                       cations  (Figure   Ruminococcaceae,
                                                           4a). The  3 most   and  Bacteroidaceae.
                                                                              dominant    bacterial However,
                                                                                                      families  there
                                                                                                                across  is
                                                                                                                         allvariation
                                          subsequent most abundant families between locations. Within the off-tumor microbiota,locationsin the
                                                                                                                                           weresubse-
                                                                                                                                                 Lach-
                                           quent most
                                       nospiraceae,        abundant families
                                                      Ruminococcaceae,           between locations.
                                                                           and Bacteroidaceae.           Withinthere
                                                                                                  However,       the off-tumor
                                                                                                                       is variation  microbiota,   the
                                                                                                                                        in the subse-
                                           next
                                       quent     mostabundant
                                               most     abundant family
                                                                    familieswas  Fusobacteriaceae,
                                                                              between    locations.followed
                                                                                                       Within by   Enterobacteriaceae in
                                                                                                                the off-tumor                the right
                                                                                                                                     microbiota,   the
                                           colon  and    Prevotellaceae in the left colon. While   in  the on-tumor     microbiota
                                       next most abundant family was Fusobacteriaceae, followed by Enterobacteriaceae in the right     the next  most
                                           abundant
                                       colon            family is Prevotellaceae,
                                              and Prevotellaceae                  followed
                                                                     in the left colon.      by Streptococcaceae
                                                                                         While   in the on-tumor   in microbiota
                                                                                                                       the right-sided thetumor   and
                                                                                                                                           next most
                                           Rikenellaceae in the left-sided tumors (Figure 4b).
                                       abundant     family is Prevotellaceae, followed by Streptococcaceae in the right-sided tumor and
       Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1108                                                                                                       6 of 11



                                       the next most abundant family was Fusobacteriaceae, followed by Enterobacteriaceae in the
                                       right colon and Prevotellaceae in the left colon. While in the on-tumor microbiota the next
Microorganisms 2021, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                          7 of 12
                                       most abundant family is Prevotellaceae, followed by Streptococcaceae in the right-sided tumor
                                       and Rikenellaceae in the left-sided tumors (Figure 4b).


             (a)                                                            (b)




             Figure 4. On- and off-tumor phylogenetic profiles of gut bacterial populations in the right and left colon. Relative abundance
     Figure 4. On- and off-tumor phylogenetic profiles of gut bacterial populations in the right and left colon. Relative abun-
            of on- and off-tumor mucosal adherent gut bacterial microbiota at phylum (a) and family (b) taxonomic levels in right and
     dance of on- and off-tumor mucosal adherent gut bacterial microbiota at phylum (a) and family (b) taxonomic levels in
            left colon.
     right and left colon.
                                           3.3. Comparison of Bacterial Taxa between the Right and Left Colon
                                      3.3. Comparison of Bacterial Taxa between the Right and Left Colon
                                                 Differences in gut bacterial populations between right- and left-sided colorectal can-
                                             Differences
                                            cer            in gut
                                                patients were      bacterial
                                                                assessed      populations
                                                                          using LEfSe         between right-
                                                                                        to determine    bacterialand   left-sided
                                                                                                                   taxa that        colorectal can-
                                                                                                                              are significantly
                                            enriched were
                                      cer patients           assessed
                                                       between          using
                                                                 locations.  TheLEfSe   to determine
                                                                                  off-tumor              bacterial
                                                                                              microbiota of          taxa that
                                                                                                               right-sided       are cancer
                                                                                                                             colorectalsignificantly
                                            patients showed   greater  abundances    of species  of the Lachnoclostridium,
                                      enriched between locations. The off-tumor microbiota of right-sided colorectal cancer  Selenomonas,    and pa-
                                            Ruminococcus   genera.   Whereas,   the off-tumor    microbiota   of left-sided
                                      tients showed greater abundances of species of the Lachnoclostridium, Selenomonas, and colorectal   cancer
                                            patients is enriched with Epsilonbacteraeota phylum, Campylobacteria class, Pasteurel-
                                      Ruminococcus      genera. Whereas, the off-tumor microbiota of left-sided colorectal cancer pa-
                                            lales and Campylobacterales orders, Campylobacteraceae, Bacillales Family XI, Clostridiales
                                      tients is enriched with Epsilonbacteraeota phylum, Campylobacteria class, Pasteurellales
                                            Family XI, Peptostreptococcaceae and Pasteurellaceae families, and Campylobacter, Gemella,
                                      and Granulicatella,
                                            Campylobacterales       orders,
                                                           Parvimonas,       Campylobacteraceae,
                                                                         Anaerosporobacter,           Bacillales(UCG010),
                                                                                             Lachnospiraceae      Family XI,  Clostridiales Family
                                                                                                                            Peptostreptococcus,
                                      XI, Peptostreptococcaceae     and  Pasteurellaceae  families,    and Campylobacter,     Gemella,
                                            Selenomonas, and Haemophilus genera (Figure 5a,b). The on-tumor microbiota of left-sided      Granulica-
                                      tella,cancer
                                             Parvimonas,   Anaerosporobacter,
                                                    patients showed               Lachnospiraceae
                                                                       greater abundances            (UCG010), and Vadin
                                                                                              of Methylophilaceae  Peptostreptococcus,     Selenomo-
                                                                                                                                 BE97 families
                                      nas, and Haemophilus genera (Figure 5a,b). The on-tumor microbiota of left-sided cancer
                                            and  Alloprevotella, Intestinibacter, Romboutsia,   and   Ruminococcus    2 genera,   compared     to
                                            right-sided
                                      patients    showed colorectal
                                                            greater cancer   patients
                                                                     abundances     of(Figure   5c,d).
                                                                                        MethylophilaceaeCollectively,
                                                                                                            and    Vadinthese
                                                                                                                          BE97 results  support
                                                                                                                                  families   and Al-
                                            the diversity data,  with  the off-tumor   microbiota    showing   large  differences
                                      loprevotella, Intestinibacter, Romboutsia, and Ruminococcus 2 genera, compared to right-      in bacterial
                                      sided populations
                                              colorectalbetween     the right(Figure
                                                          cancer patients     and left 5c,d).
                                                                                       colon. Collectively,
                                                                                               In contrast, the  on-tumor
                                                                                                              these         microbiota
                                                                                                                      results  support seems
                                                                                                                                          the diver-
                                            less affected by location, supporting a cancer-defined microbiota that is more constant
                                      sity data, with the off-tumor microbiota showing large differences in bacterial populations
                                            between the right and left colon.
                                      between the right and left colon. In contrast, the on-tumor microbiota seems less affected
                                      by location, supporting a cancer-defined microbiota that is more constant between the
                                      right and left colon.
Microorganisms 2021, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                8 of 12
       Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1108                                                                                                                 7 of 11




            (a)                                                           (b)




            (c)                                                            (d)




             5. Linear
     FigureFigure       discriminant
                    5. Linear           analysis
                               discriminant       (LDA)
                                             analysis      effect
                                                       (LDA)        sizesize
                                                                 effect  (LEfSe)   comparing
                                                                             (LEfSe)  comparingright
                                                                                                  rightand
                                                                                                         andleft   bacterial taxa
                                                                                                              leftbacterial             the on-
                                                                                                                                    in the
                                                                                                                              taxa in            and off-
                                                                                                                                            on- and
           microbiota.
     tumor off-tumor       Histograms    of LDA   scores   for   differentially  abundant   bacterial   taxa  between    right  and
                       microbiota. Histograms of LDA scores for differentially abundant bacterial taxa between right and left colon in left colon  in off-
     tumor off-tumor
            (a) and on-tumor
                       (a) and on-tumor (c). LEfSe cladogram representing differentially abundant bacterial groups in off-tumor (b) and and
                                  (c). LEfSe  cladogram      representing     differentially abundant      bacterial  groups    in  off-tumor     (b)
     on-tumor   (d) microbiota
           on-tumor (d) microbiotabetween   right
                                       between     andand
                                                right   leftleft
                                                              colon.  Differentially
                                                                 colon. Differentially abundant   taxaatathe
                                                                                       abundant taxa            genus
                                                                                                            thegenus    taxonomic
                                                                                                                     taxonomic          levels
                                                                                                                                   levels       or higher
                                                                                                                                           or higher
     were included.    Taxa  and   nodes  highlighted    in  green   were   more   significant in  the  right  colon  and  red
           were included. Taxa and nodes highlighted in green were more significant in the right colon and red in the left colon.in  the  left colon.

                                           Difference
                                      3.4. 3.4.         in in
                                                Difference Paired  On-
                                                              Paired On-and
                                                                         andOff-Tumor BacterialTaxa
                                                                            Off-Tumor Bacterial Taxain in Right-
                                                                                                       Right- andand  Left-Sided
                                                                                                                  Left-Sided     Colorectal
                                                                                                                             Colorectal
                                           Cancer  Patients
                                      Cancer Patients
                                                 In order to assess the differences in bacterial taxa between the tumor-associated and
                                            In order to assess the differences in bacterial taxa between the tumor-associated and
                                           tumor-adjacent microbiotas in each location, we performed a LEfSe comparing paired
                                      tumor-adjacent
                                           on- and off-tumormicrobiotas
                                                                   bacterialintaxa
                                                                                eachin location,
                                                                                        right- andwe    performed
                                                                                                     left-sided         a LEfSe
                                                                                                                  colorectal       comparing
                                                                                                                              cancer   patients. paired
                                                                                                                                                  In the on-
                                      andleft-sided
                                            off-tumor      bacterial
                                                       colorectal     taxa patients,
                                                                    cancer   in right-24and     left-sided
                                                                                            bacterial         colorectal
                                                                                                       taxa were            cancerenriched
                                                                                                                    differentially   patients.between
                                                                                                                                                 In the left-
                                      sided   colorectal
                                           the on-           cancer patients,
                                                    and off-tumor      microbiota.24 These
                                                                                      bacterial    taxa the
                                                                                               include   were Lachnoclostridium    enriched
                                                                                                                 differentially genus               was the
                                                                                                                                               between
                                                                                                                                           which
                                      on- and     off-tumor
                                           enriched              microbiota.
                                                       in the on-tumor           These and
                                                                            microbiota    include thethe   Lachnoclostridium
                                                                                                       Cyanobacteria      phylum,  genus   which was en-
                                                                                                                                     Melainabacteria
                                           class,
                                      riched    inGastranaerophilales,
                                                   the on-tumor microbiota and Corynebacteriales         orders, Dietziaceae,
                                                                                      and the Cyanobacteria           phylum,   Corynebacteriaceae,
                                                                                                                                  Melainabacteria    Eg-
                                                                                                                                                       class,
                                           gerthellaceae.  Rikenellaceae  and    Clostridiales vadin   BB60  group   families,
                                      Gastranaerophilales, and Corynebacteriales orders, Dietziaceae, Corynebacteriaceae, Egger-Dietzia, Paraprevotella,
                                          Prevotella
                                      thellaceae.     9, Alistipes, Lachnospira,
                                                    Rikenellaceae                   Ruminococcus
                                                                     and Clostridiales                torquesgroup
                                                                                             vadin BB60        group,families,
                                                                                                                       Paeniclostridium,
                                                                                                                                  Dietzia,Eubacterium
                                                                                                                                            Paraprevotella,
                                           coprostanoligenes group, Acidaminococcus and Aquabacterium genera which were enriched
                                      Prevotella 9, Alistipes, Lachnospira, Ruminococcus torques group, Paeniclostridium, Eubacterium
                                           in the off-tumor microbiota (Figure 6c,d). In the right-sided colorectal cancer patients,
                                      coprostanoligenes       group, Acidaminococcus and Aquabacterium genera which were enriched in
                                           there were 3 bacterial taxa differentially enriched between the on- and off-tumor micro-
                                      the off-tumor
                                           biota. These include the(Figure
                                                         microbiota                 6c,d). In thefamily,
                                                                         Porphyromonadaceae          right-sided     colorectaland
                                                                                                             and Lachnospira       cancer   patients, there
                                                                                                                                       Porphyromonas
                                      were 3     bacterial
                                           genera,  which weretaxa more
                                                                    differentially      enriched
                                                                          abundant in the           between
                                                                                               on-tumor          the on-
                                                                                                            compared     to the   off-tumor
                                                                                                                            andoff-tumor        microbiota.
                                                                                                                                            microbiota
                                      These    include
                                          (Figure   6a,b).the   Porphyromonadaceae
                                                             Collectively,  this suggests  family,
                                                                                              that and      Lachnospira
                                                                                                    patients with     right-sided Porphyromonas
                                                                                                                           and colorectal            genera,
                                                                                                                                                 cancer
                                      whichhave   an on-
                                               were   more  and  off-tumorin the
                                                               abundant       microbiota
                                                                                    on-tumor that is  relativelyto the
                                                                                                   compared        consistent,   showing
                                                                                                                         off-tumor         only small
                                                                                                                                      microbiota     (Figure
                                           differences
                                      6a,b).              in bacterial
                                              Collectively,      this taxa
                                                                      suggests lower
                                                                                   thattaxonomic
                                                                                          patientslevels.
                                                                                                      with In    contrast, patients
                                                                                                             right-sided     colorectalwith  left-sided
                                                                                                                                          cancer    have an
                                      on- colorectal
                                           and off-tumorcancermicrobiota
                                                                 have an on- that
                                                                                and off-tumor
                                                                                     is relativelymicrobiota    that shows
                                                                                                       consistent,    showing distinct
                                                                                                                                  onlybacterial   popu-
                                                                                                                                         small differences
                                           lations, showing differences at the phylum, class, and order taxonomic levels.
                                      in bacterial taxa lower taxonomic levels. In contrast, patients with left-sided colorectal
                                      cancer have an on- and off-tumor microbiota that shows distinct bacterial populations,
                                      showing differences at the phylum, class, and order taxonomic levels.
Microorganisms 2021, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                             9 of 12
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1108                                                                                                                          8 of 11




     (a)                                                             (b)




     (c)                                                             (d)




     Figure 6. Comparison of paired on- and off-tumor microbiota between right and left colon. LDA scores for differentially
     abundant bacterial
     abundant   bacterial taxa
                          taxa between
                               between paired
                                        paired on-
                                               on- and
                                                   and off-tumor
                                                        off-tumor microbiota in the
                                                                  microbiota in      right (a)
                                                                                 the right (a) and
                                                                                               and left
                                                                                                   left (c)
                                                                                                        (c) colon.
                                                                                                            colon. LEfSe
                                                                                                                   LEfSe cladogram
                                                                                                                          cladogram
     demonstrating differentially abundant bacterial taxa between paired on- and off-tumor microbiota in right (b) and left
     demonstrating   differentially abundant bacterial taxa between paired on-  and  off-tumor  microbiota   in right (b) and left (d)
                                                                                                                                   (d)
     colon. Differentially abundant taxa at the genus taxonomic levels or higher were included. Taxa and nodes highlighted in
     colon. Differentially abundant taxa at the genus taxonomic levels or higher were included. Taxa and nodes highlighted in
     red were more significant in the off-tumor microbiota and green in the on-tumor microbiota.
     red were more significant in the off-tumor microbiota and green in the on-tumor microbiota.

                                  4.
                                  4. Discussion
                                     Discussion
                                        Previous
                                         Previous studies
                                                      studies havehave attempted
                                                                          attempted to   to unravel
                                                                                            unravel the       complex relationship
                                                                                                        the complex       relationship between
                                                                                                                                             between gut gut
                                  bacteria
                                  bacteria and colorectal cancer [9,10]. However, the composition of the colonic microbiota
                                             and   colorectal      cancer   [9,10].   However,      the  composition       of  the   colonic   microbiota
                                  can
                                  can bebe influenced
                                           influenced by    by aa multitude
                                                                   multitude of   of variables,
                                                                                     variables, such
                                                                                                   such as as medication.
                                                                                                              medication. Hence,Hence, thisthis leaves
                                                                                                                                                leaves thethe
                                  potential   for  the   study     of the  gut   microbiota     in  pathological     conditions
                                  potential for the study of the gut microbiota in pathological conditions to be confounded           to  be confounded
                                  by
                                  by discrepancies
                                       discrepancies in   in therapeutic
                                                              therapeutic interventions
                                                                                interventions [14,15].
                                                                                                   [14,15]. ToTo the
                                                                                                                  the best
                                                                                                                      best of of our
                                                                                                                                  our knowledge,
                                                                                                                                        knowledge, this  this
                                  study is
                                  study   is the
                                             the first
                                                   first time
                                                          time that
                                                                  that the   colonic on-
                                                                        the colonic     on- and
                                                                                             and off-tumor
                                                                                                    off-tumor microbiota
                                                                                                                  microbiota has   has been
                                                                                                                                         been studied
                                                                                                                                                studied in in
                                  right-
                                  right- and
                                          and left-sided
                                                left-sided colorectal
                                                               colorectal cancer
                                                                             cancer patients
                                                                                       patients with
                                                                                                  with iron     deficiency anemia.
                                                                                                          iron deficiency      anemia.
                                        This
                                         This study
                                               study shows
                                                        shows that that the
                                                                         the on-
                                                                             on- and
                                                                                   and off-tumor
                                                                                         off-tumor microbiota
                                                                                                      microbiota between right- and left-sided    left-sided
                                  colorectal
                                  colorectal cancer patients show differential microbialdiversity
                                               cancer     patients     show    differential   microbial        diversity andand  bacterial
                                                                                                                                    bacterialtaxa.   Off-tu-
                                                                                                                                                 taxa.   Off-
                                  mor
                                  tumor alpha
                                           alphadiversity
                                                    diversity is is
                                                                  significantly
                                                                      significantly greater  in in
                                                                                        greater  right-   compared
                                                                                                      right-   compared    left-sided
                                                                                                                       to to               colorectal
                                                                                                                                   left-sided           can-
                                                                                                                                                 colorectal
                                  cer  patients,
                                  cancer           showing
                                           patients,   showing    greater   bacterial
                                                                      greater   bacterialdiversity,
                                                                                           diversity,abundance,
                                                                                                         abundance,and  andrichness.
                                                                                                                                richness.Furthermore,
                                                                                                                                             Furthermore,
                                  off-tumor
                                  off-tumor betabetadiversity
                                                       diversityshows showsignificantly
                                                                                significantly     different
                                                                                              different        bacterial
                                                                                                           bacterial        community
                                                                                                                      community               clusters
                                                                                                                                        clusters   betweenbe-
                                  right-  right- and
                                  tween and              left-sided
                                                left-sided              colorectal
                                                               colorectal    cancer cancer     patients.
                                                                                       patients.            Comparison
                                                                                                   Comparison                 of off-tumor
                                                                                                                    of off-tumor       taxonomy taxonomy
                                                                                                                                                      shows
                                  there    there29to be
                                  showsto be               29 taxa
                                                     bacterial  bacterialthataxa
                                                                               are that are    differentially
                                                                                    differentially   enriched enriched
                                                                                                                  between the  between                   and
                                                                                                                                                 rightcolon.
                                                                                                                                            the left
                                                                                                                                    right and
                                  left
                                  Thesecolon.   These in
                                          differences    differences
                                                               off-tumor  in bacterial
                                                                             off-tumor bacterial
                                                                                          populations   populations
                                                                                                            between the between
                                                                                                                              right and     rightcolon
                                                                                                                                       the left     and left
                                                                                                                                                          are
                                  potentially
                                  colon          explained by
                                          are potentially            differences
                                                                 explained      by in   colonic in
                                                                                     differences  nutrient    availability.
                                                                                                        colonic    nutrientNutrient         availability
                                                                                                                                 availability.     Nutrient is
                                  greatest   in the
                                  availability        proximalincolon
                                                  is greatest           the and     decreases
                                                                             proximal            towards the
                                                                                           colon and               distaltowards
                                                                                                           decreases       colon, the through     nutrients
                                                                                                                                             distal   colon,
                                  being
                                  through reabsorbed
                                             nutrients in  beingthe colon     and in
                                                                     reabsorbed     being   utilized
                                                                                        the colon    andbybeing
                                                                                                             residential    bacteria
                                                                                                                   utilized by           [23]. Therefore,
                                                                                                                                    residential     bacteria
                                  this
                                  [23]. potentially
                                         Therefore, thiscreates     differential
                                                               potentially          nutrient
                                                                                creates        niches available
                                                                                          differential     nutrient for    colonic
                                                                                                                      niches           bacteria
                                                                                                                                  available    forbetween
                                                                                                                                                     colonic
                                  the  right  and    left  colon,    which    may     explain    why   the   right  colon
                                  bacteria between the right and left colon, which may explain why the right colon shows     shows      greater    bacterial
                                  diversity
                                  greater      compared
                                            bacterial          to thecompared
                                                         diversity       left [24]. Out
                                                                                      to theofleft
                                                                                                the[24].
                                                                                                     29 bacterial
                                                                                                           Out of the   29 that
                                                                                                                     taxa                   differentially
                                                                                                                                     weretaxa
                                                                                                                             bacterial           that were
                                  enriched    within
                                  differentially         the off-tumor
                                                     enriched                microbiota,
                                                                    within the      off-tumor 26 taxa   were 26
                                                                                                  microbiota,   significantly
                                                                                                                      taxa were    enriched     within en-
                                                                                                                                       significantly      the
                                  left colon.
                                  riched        With
                                           within      theleft
                                                     the     potential     differences
                                                                 colon. With      the in     nutrient
                                                                                       potential         niches in
                                                                                                    differences   between
                                                                                                                      nutrient      nichesand
                                                                                                                              the right           left colon,
                                                                                                                                             between      the
                                  right and left colon, these bacterial taxa may be specially adapted to thrive within the
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1108                                                                                           9 of 11



                               these bacterial taxa may be specially adapted to thrive within the potentially nutrient-
                               deprived environment within the left colon. Whereas they may be outcompeted by more
                               dominant bacteria that thrive in the potential nutrient-rich environment in the right colon.
                               These more specialized taxa within the left colon may dominate the microbiota, explaining
                               why a lower bacterial diversity may be present. Whereas in the right colon there is a
                               greater number of bacteria which are more evenly spread, contributing to greater bacterial
                               diversity. However, as less of these bacterial taxa dominate, this leads them to not being as
                               significantly enriched when compared to the left colon. In contrast, the on-tumor microbiota
                               shows no differences in alpha and beta diversity between right- and left-sided colorectal
                               cancer patients. Comparison of on-tumor taxonomy shows there to be 8 bacterial taxa
                               that are differentially enriched between the right and left colon. Collectively, this suggests
                               that the on-tumor microbiota between right- and left-sided colorectal cancer patients are
                               relatively more consistent when compared to the differences observed in the off-tumor
                               microbiota, suggesting that the on-tumor microbiota between the right and left colon is
                               not as influenced by colonic nutrient availability, potentially supporting a cancer-defined
                               microbiota that is less affected by tumor location.
                                     Cancer-associated microbiota are influenced by the tumor microenvironment, and this
                               is regulated by many factors, such as the mucosal immune system, genetic and epigenetic
                               factors, and vascular infiltration. How the cancer-associated microbiota develops depends
                               on these factors, all of which are also altered between the right and left colon. Hence, this
                               leaves the potential for alterations between the on- and off-tumor microbiota to be differ-
                               entially regulated between patients with right- and left-sided colorectal tumors [5,7,11].
                               Comparison of bacterial taxa between paired on- and off-tumor microbiota showed that
                               patients with right-sided colorectal cancer had a relatively consistent on- and off-tumor
                               microbiota, with only 3 bacterial taxa being differentially enriched. In contrast patients
                               with left-sided colorectal cancer had a more varied on- and off-tumor microbiota, showing
                               24 differentially enriched bacterial taxa. This supports a previous study by Thomas et al.
                               (2016) comparing the microbiota of rectal (left-sided) cancer patients and healthy con-
                               trols. The authors showed there to be significant differences in bacterial taxa and diversity
                               between cancerous and healthy rectal microbiota [25]. Collectively this implies that the
                               tumor-defined microbiota may be more consistent to the microbiota found in the right
                               colon compared to the left. Suggesting that there is a shift in the left tumor microbiota
                               away from the typical microbiota found in the left colon, becoming more similar to the
                               right colonic microbiota. Along with patients with right-sided colorectal cancer developing
                               symptoms later, this may also explain why right-sided tumors tend to be more advanced
                               and larger compared to left-sided tumors, as the right colonic microbiota is primed to
                               support colorectal cancer progression [1].
                                     Previous studies comparing the microbiota between the right and left colon, such
                               as those by Flemer et al. (2017) and Gao et al. (2015), have presented differences in
                               the on-tumor microbiota between the proximal and distal colon. These studies have
                               accounted for medicinal intervention with antibiotics prior to surgery; however, neither
                               study assessed the prevalence of iron deficiency anemia or enteral iron therapy in their
                               cohort [10,11]. With iron deficiency anemia tending to be unequally prevalent between
                               right- and left-sided colorectal cancer patients, this may influence the differences observed
                               in the tumor microbiota between locations [26]. As enteral iron therapy has been shown
                               to alter the gut microbiota, this leaves the potential to present with differential bacterial
                               populations compared to patients treated with parenteral iron, or those who are not iron
                               deficient [13,16].
                                     This pilot study provides a novel insight into the on- and off-tumor microbial profiles
                               between right- and left-sided colorectal cancer patients. Suggesting a varied microbiota
                               between the right and left colon; however, the presence of a colonic tumor leads to a more
                               consistent cancer-defined microbiota. This is potentially through the left tumor microbiota
                               being more similar to the microbiota found in the right colon, suggesting that the right
                               colonic microbiota may be more favorable to support colonic tumors. Despite the relatively
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1108                                                                                                        10 of 11



                                  small sample size of this study, we were able to infer significant differences between right-
                                  and left-sided colorectal cancer patients, which can form the foundation for further large-
                                  scale explorative studies. Future studies may overcome some limitations of our study by
                                  accounting for further confounding variables such as diet. As well as including a more
                                  diverse study population, ensuring a more balanced spread of patient characteristics such
                                  as gender and tumor stage between groups. Further clinical and translational work is
                                  required to understand the influence of iron supplementation on the gut microbiota in right-
                                  and left-sided colorectal cancer, how this can influence the stage of disease, and to assess
                                  any causal relationship between colonic bacterial populations and oncological outcomes.

                                  Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.O.A.-H., H.S., A.G.A., A.D.B. and M.J.B.; methodology,
                                  H.O.A.-H., M.N.Q. and O.P.; software, O.P. and M.N.Q.; validation, O.P., H.O.A.-H. and M.N.Q.;
                                  formal analysis, O.P. and M.N.Q.; investigation, O.P., H.O.A.-H. and M.N.Q.; resources, O.P., H.O.A.-
                                  H., M.N.Q., A.K. and E.A.D.; data curation, O.P. and M.N.Q.; writing—original draft preparation,
                                  O.P.; writing—review and editing, O.P., H.O.A.-H., M.N.Q., E.A.D., H.S., A.K., A.G.A., A.D.B. and
                                  M.J.B.; visualization, O.P. and M.N.Q.; supervision, H.O.A.-H. and M.J.B.; project administration,
                                  H.O.A.-H.; funding acquisition, H.O.A.-H., A.G.A. and M.J.B. All authors have read and agreed to
                                  the published version of the manuscript.
                                  Funding: Within the original IVICA trial the Ferinject™ used was donated to all study centers,
                                  with the exception of Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, by Vifor Pharma (Glattbrugg,
                                  Switzerland). This study represents independent research funded through the National Institute for
                                  Health Research (NIHR) Research for Patient Benefit (RfPB) program (grant number PB-PG-0110-
                                  21041). The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Health
                                  Service, the NIHR, or the Department of Health.
                                  Institutional Review Board Statement: This study was undertaken in line with the Declaration
                                  of Helsinki. The IVICA trial ethical approval was granted by the National Research and Ethics
                                  Service (East Midlands—Nottingham 2 Research Ethics Committee, 11/EM/0237). This study was
                                  registered with the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (2011-002185-21) and
                                  Clinical Trials.Gov (NCT01701310).
                                  Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
                                  Data Availability Statement: The datasets generated and analyzed during the study are available
                                  from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: M.J.B. research department has received grant support from Tillots Pharma
                                  and Vifor Pharma (Switzerland). M.J.B. has received honoraria and travel support for consulting or
                                  lecturing from Vifor Pharma, Tillots Pharma, and Abbvie. The funders had no role in the design of
                                  the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in
                                  the decision to publish the results.

References
1.    Baran, B.; Ozupek, N.M.; Tetik, N.Y.; Acar, E.; Bekcioglu, O.; Baskin, Y. Difference Between Left-Sided and Right-Sided Colorectal
      Cancer: A Focused Review of Literature. Gastroenterol. Res. 2018, 11, 264–273. [CrossRef]
2.    Mukund, K.; Syulyukina, N.; Ramamoorthy, S.; Subramaniam, S. Right and left-sided colon cancers—Specificity of molecular
      mechanisms in tumorigenesis and progression. BMC Cancer 2020, 20, 1–15. [CrossRef]
3.    Kwak, H.D.; Ju, J.K.; Lee, S.Y.; Kim, C.H.; Kim, Y.J.; Kim, H.R. Comparison of Right-side and Left-side Colon Cancers Following
      Laparoscopic Radical Lymphadenectomy. J. Investig. Surg. 2021, 34, 142–147. [CrossRef]
4.    Manyama, M.; Malyango, A.; Raoof, A.; Mligiliche, N.L.; Msuya, C.; Nassir, N.; Mtui, E. A variant source of arterial supply to the
      ascending, transverse and descending colon. Surg. Radiol. Anat. 2019, 41, 1383–1386. [CrossRef]
5.    De Renzi, G.; Gaballo, G.; Gazzaniga, P.; Nicolazzo, C. Molecular Biomarkers according to Primary Tumor Location in Colorectal
      Cancer: Current Standard and New Insights. Oncology 2020, 99, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Balchen, V.; Simon, K. Colorectal cancer development and advances in screening. Clin. Interv. Aging 2016, 11, 967–976. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
7.    Alhinai, E.A.; Walton, G.E.; Commane, D.M. The Role of the Gut Microbiota in Colorectal Cancer Causation. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019,
      20, 5295. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.    Flemer, B.; Warren, R.D.; Barrett, M.P.; Cisek, K.; Das, A.; Jeffery, I.B.; Hurley, E.; O’Riordain, M.; Shanahan, F.; O’Toole, P.W.
      The oral microbiota in colorectal cancer is distinctive and predictive. Gut 2017, 67, 1454–1463. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1108                                                                                                       11 of 11



9.    Flemer, B.; Herlihy, M.; O’Riordain, M.; Shanahan, F.; O’Toole, P.W. Tumour-associated and non-tumour-associated microbiota:
      Addendum. Gut Microbes 2018, 9, 1–5. [CrossRef]
10.   Flemer, B.; Lynch, D.B.; Brown, J.M.R.; Jeffery, I.B.; Ryan, F.J.; Claesson, M.J.; O’Riordain, M.; Shanahan, F.; O’Toole, P.W.
      Tumour-associated and non-tumour-associated microbiota in colorectal cancer. Gut 2017, 66, 633–643. [CrossRef]
11.   Gao, Z.; Guo, B.; Gao, R.; Zhu, Q.; Qin, H. Microbiota Disbiosis is Associated with Colorectal Cancer. Front. Microbiol. 2015, 6, 20.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Al-Hassi, H.O.; Ng, O.; Brookes, M. Tumour-associated and non-tumour-associated microbiota in colorectal cancer. Gut 2018,
      67, 395. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   Phipps, O.; Al-Hassi, H.; Quraishi, M.; Dickson, E.; Segal, J.; Steed, H.; Kumar, A.; Acheson, A.; Beggs, A.; Brookes, M. Oral and
      Intravenous Iron Therapy Differentially Alter the On- and Off-Tumor Microbiota in Anemic Colorectal Cancer Patients. Cancers
      2021, 13, 1341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Phipps, O.; Al-Hassi, H.O.; Quraishi, M.N.; Kumar, A.; Brookes, M.J. Influence of Iron on the Gut Microbiota in Colorectal Cancer.
      Nutrients 2020, 12, 2512. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.   Weersma, R.K.; Zhernakova, A.; Fu, J. Interaction between drugs and the gut microbiome. Gut 2020, 69, 1510–1519. [CrossRef]
16.   Lee, T.; Clavel, T.; Smirnov, K.; Schmidt, A.; Lagkouvardos, I.; Walker, A.; Lucio, M.; Michalke, B.; Schmitt-Kopplin, P.; Fedorak,
      R.; et al. Oral versus intravenous iron replacement therapy distinctly alters the gut microbiota and metabolome in patients with
      IBD. Gut 2016, 66, 863–871. [CrossRef]
17.   Keeler, B.D.; Simpson, J.A.; Ng, O.; Padmanabhan, H.; Brookes, M.J.; Acheson, A.G.; Banerjea, A.; Walter, C.; Maxwell-Armstrong,
      C.; Williams, J.; et al. Randomized clinical trial of preoperative oral versus intravenous iron in anaemic patients with colorectal
      cancer. J. Br. Surg. 2017, 104, 214–221. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.   Earth Microbiome Project. Illumina 16s PCR Protocols. 2020. Available online: https://www.earthmicrobiome.org/protocols-
      and-standards/16s/ (accessed on 29 June 2020).
19.   Bolyen, E.; Rideout, J.R.; Dillon, M.R.; Bokulich, N.A.; Abnet, C.C.; Al-Ghalith, G.A.; Alexander, H.; Alm, E.J.; Arumugam, M.;
      Asnicar, F.; et al. Reproducible, interactive, scalable and extensible microbiome data science using QIIME 2. Nat. Biotechnol. 2019,
      37, 852–857. [CrossRef]
20.   Quast, C.; Pruesse, E.; Yilmaz, P.; Gerken, J.; Schweer, T.; Yarza, P.; Peplies, J.; Glöckner, F.O. The SILVA Ribosomal RNA Gene
      Database Project: Improved Data Processing and Web-Based Tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013, 41, D590–D596. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.   Wickham, H. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2016.
22.   Segata, N.; Izard, J.; Waldron, L.; Gevers, D.; Miropolsky, L.; Garrett, W.S.; Huttenhower, C. Metagenomic biomarker discovery
      and explanation. Genome Biol. 2011, 12, R60. [CrossRef]
23.   Lyra, A.; Forssten, S.; Rolny, P.; Wettergren, Y.; Lahtinen, S.J.; Salli, K.; Cedgård, L.; Odin, E.; Gustavsson, B.; Ouwehand, A.C.
      Comparison of Bacterial Quantities in Left and Right Colon Biopsies and Faeces. World J. Gastroenterol. WJG 2012, 18, 4404–4411.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Sun, J.; Kato, I. Gut Microbiota, Inflammation and Colorectal Cancer. Genes Dis. 2016, 3, 130–143. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.   Thomas, A.M.; Jesus, E.C.; Lopes, A.; Aguiar, J.S.; Begnami, M.D.; Rocha, R.M.; Carpinetti, P.A.; Camargo, A.A.; Hoffmann, C.;
      Freitas, H.C.; et al. Tissue-Associated Bacterial Alterations in Rectal Carcinoma Patients Revealed by 16S rRNA Community
      Profiling. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2016, 6, 179. [CrossRef]
26.   Acher, P.L.; Al-Mishlab, T.; Rahman, M.; Bates, T. Iron-deficiency anaemia and delay in the diagnosis of colorectal cancer.
      Color. Dis. 2003, 5, 145–148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
