              cancers
Article
Oral and Intravenous Iron Therapy Differentially Alter the
On- and Off-Tumor Microbiota in Anemic Colorectal
Cancer Patients
Oliver Phipps 1, * , Hafid O. Al-Hassi 1 , Mohammed N. Quraishi 2,3,4 , Edward A. Dickson 5,6 , Jonathan Segal 7 ,
Helen Steed 1,8 , Aditi Kumar 1,8 , Austin G. Acheson 5,6 , Andrew D. Beggs 2,4 and Matthew J. Brookes 1,8

                                          1   Research Institute in Healthcare Science, Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Wolverhampton,
                                              Wolverhampton WV1 1LY, UK; h.omar6@wlv.ac.uk (H.O.A.-H.); helen.steed@nhs.net (H.S.);
                                              aditikumar@nhs.net (A.K.); matthew.brookes@nhs.net (M.J.B.)
                                          2   Surgical Research Laboratory, Institute of Cancer & Genomic Science, University of Birmingham,
                                              Birmingham B15 2TQ, UK; M.N.Quraishi@bham.ac.uk (M.N.Q.); a.beggs@bham.ac.uk (A.D.B.)
                                          3   Microbiome Treatment Centre, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK
                                          4   Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust,
                                              Birmingham B15 2TH, UK
                                          5   NIHR Biomedical Research Centre in Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases, Nottingham University Hospitals
                                              NHS Trust, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK; edward.dickson1@nottingham.ac.uk (E.A.D.);
                                              austin.acheson@nottingham.ac.uk (A.G.A.)
                                          6   Department of Colorectal Surgery, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham NG5 1PB, UK
                                7
                                       Department of Gastroenterology, St. Mark’s Hospital, Harrow HA1 3UJ, UK; jonathansegal1@nhs.net
                                          8   Department of Gastroenterology, Royal Wolverhampton Hospitals NHS Trust,
Citation: Phipps, O.; Al-Hassi, H.O.;         Wolverhampton WV10 0QP, UK
Quraishi, M.N.; Dickson, E.A.; Segal,     *   Correspondence: o.phipps@wlv.ac.uk
J.; Steed, H.; Kumar, A.; Acheson,
A.G.; Beggs, A.D.; Brookes, M.J.
                                          Simple Summary: Anemia is commonly associated with colorectal cancer and often requires in-
Oral and Intravenous Iron Therapy
                                          tervention with therapeutic iron. However, iron is required for growth by the majority of colonic
Differentially Alter the On- and
                                          bacteria, leading to competition for free luminal iron. Hence, this leaves the potential for the route of
Off-Tumor Microbiota in Anemic
                                          iron administration to lead to differential gut bacterial populations. This study aimed to investigate
Colorectal Cancer Patients. Cancers
2021, 13, 1341. https://doi.org/
                                          the differences in on- and off-tumor bacterial populations following oral and intravenous therapy
10.3390/cancers13061341                   in anemic colorectal cancer patients. The following iron therapies were shown to be differential to
                                          bacterial diversity, microbial populations, and predictive metagenomics, inferring that oral iron-
Academic Editors: John Tsiaoussis         treated patients may have a potentially more procarcinogenic microbiota compared to intravenous
and John Souglakos                        iron-treated patients. Overall, this suggests that intravenous iron may be a more beneficial treatment
                                          for anemia in colorectal cancer, in order to limit microbial perturbations associated with oral iron.
Received: 4 February 2021
Accepted: 12 March 2021                   Abstract: Iron deficiency anemia is a common complication of colorectal cancer and may require
Published: 16 March 2021                  iron therapy. Oral iron can increase the iron available to gut bacteria and may alter the colonic
                                          microbiota. We performed an intervention study to compare oral and intravenous iron therapy
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                          on the colonic tumor-associated (on-tumor) and paired non-tumor-associated adjacent (off-tumor)
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                          microbiota. Anemic patients with colorectal adenocarcinoma received either oral ferrous sulphate
published maps and institutional affil-
                                          (n = 16) or intravenous ferric carboxymaltose (n = 24). On- and off-tumor biopsies were obtained
iations.
                                          post-surgery and microbial profiling was performed using 16S ribosomal RNA analysis. Off-tumor
                                          α- and β-diversity were significantly different between iron treatment groups. No differences in
                                          on-tumor diversity were observed. Off-tumor microbiota of oral iron-treated patients showed higher
                                          abundances of the orders Clostridiales, Cytophagales, and Anaeroplasmatales compared to intra-
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                                          venous iron-treated patients. The on-tumor microbiota was enriched with the orders Lactobacillales
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          and Alteromonadales in the oral and intravenous iron groups, respectively. The on- and off-tumor
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
                                          microbiota associated with intravenous iron-treated patients infers increased abundances of enzymes
conditions of the Creative Commons        involved in iron sequestration and anti-inflammatory/oncogenic metabolite production, compared to
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     oral iron-treated patients. Collectively, this suggests that intravenous iron may be a more appropriate
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          therapy to limit adverse microbial outcomes compared to oral iron.
4.0/).




Cancers 2021, 13, 1341. https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13061341                                               https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cancers
Cancers 2021, 13, 1341                                                                                            2 of 13




                         Keywords: iron supplementation; iron deficiency; anemia; gut microbiome; 16S rRNA; tumor micro-
                         biota; colorectal cancer




                         1. Introduction
                               Perturbations in gut bacterial populations are characteristic of colorectal cancer, with
                         the presence of pathogenic indigenous bacterial species at the expense of protective pro-
                         biotic species [1]. Driver bacteria are involved in the initiation of colorectal cancer. These
                         driver bacteria are gradually outcompeted by opportunistic passenger bacteria, which have
                         a selective advantage within the newly defined tumor-microenvironment. These passen-
                         ger bacteria can potentially either promote or hinder tumor progression, depending on
                         whether pathogenic or probiotic bacterial populations flourish [2,3]. Alongside this, the
                         gut microbiota has been shown to be altered in response to many commonly used orally
                         administered non-antibiotic drugs [4]. Hence, this allows the potential for the route of iron
                         administration in anemic colorectal cancer patients to lead to differential gut microbial
                         populations. Therefore, depending upon which bacterial populations thrive, the route of
                         iron administration may support colorectal cancer progression [2,5].
                               Iron is essential for the growth and development of the vast majority of gut bacteria,
                         with pathogenic bacteria tending to have heightened iron acquisition mechanisms [6]. Hence,
                         in anemic colorectal cancer patients, the use of oral iron supplementation has the potential to
                         alter bacterial populations of the colorectal tumor-associated (on-tumor) microbiota, as well
                         as the non-tumor-associated mucosal (off-tumor) microbiota, through increasing gut luminal
                         iron concentration [7,8]. This may suggest that a parenteral route of iron administration
                         may be more beneficial to treat anemia, without increasing iron availability to colonic
                         bacteria. Initial data from the intravenous iron in colorectal cancer associated anemia (IVICA)
                         trial suggest that intravenous iron may be more beneficial than oral iron in treating pre-
                         operative anemia [9]. However, results from the preoperative intravenous iron to treat
                         anemia before major abdominal surgery (PREVENTT) trial has put doubt over the efficacy
                         of intravenous iron pre-operatively [10]. Hence, the most beneficial treatment of anemia pre-
                         operatively, oral or intravenous iron, remains uncertain. This study intended to contribute
                         to the discussion over the route of iron administration in anemic colorectal cancer patients
                         through assessing the gut microbial outcomes following each iron therapy. We hypothesized
                         that oral iron would promote a more procarcinogenic gut microbiota, relative to intravenous
                         iron, potentially through increasing gut luminal iron concentration.
                               Current research presents conflicting evidence concerning the effect of iron supple-
                         mentation in murine studies of gut bacterial diversity [11,12]. However, to our knowledge,
                         a comparison of gut bacterial populations following oral and intravenous iron therapy in
                         human studies of colorectal cancer has yet to be explored. This pilot intervention study
                         aimed to compare the outcomes of oral and intravenous iron therapy on the on- and off-
                         tumor microbiota, in order to assess which therapy is more beneficial to treat anemia in
                         iron-deficient colorectal cancer patients.

                         2. Materials and Methods
                         2.1. Study Population
                              From the IVICA trial, a total of 40 anemic patients with non-metastatic colorectal ade-
                         nocarcinoma were randomized to receive either oral ferrous sulphate 200 mg twice a day
                         (n = 16) or intravenous iron (ferric carboxymaltose—Ferinject™; Vifor Pharma, Glattbrugg,
                         Switzerland) dosed by weight and hemoglobin in accordance with the summary of product
                         characteristics (n = 24) [9]. Treatment was administered at least 2 weeks pre-operatively
                         and anemia was defined as having a hemoglobin level 10 g/L below the sex-specific World
                         Health Organization definition (women ≤ 120 g/L, men ≤ 130 g/L). The duration of iron
                         treatment and inclusion hemoglobin for treatment groups are presented in the patient de-
                         mographics in Table 1. To limit the inclusion of non-iron-deficient anemic individuals, those
Cancers 2021, 13, 1341                                                                                                                  3 of 13




                                       with pre-existing hematological disease, renal failure, or undergoing current chemotherapy
                                       were not eligible for the trial. Colorectal tumor biopsies and paired tumor-adjacent colonic
                                       mucosal tissue biopsies were obtained post-surgery.

                         Table 1. Patient cohort demographics. Categorical variables are presented with percentages.

             Patient Characteristics                               Oral Iron (n = 16)                     Intravenous Iron (n = 24)
 Age                                                                    74.9 (7.4)                                 74.9 (9.5)
 Male                                                                    8 (50%)                                   16 (67%)
 Female                                                                  8 (50%)                                    8 (33%)
 Height, m                                                              1.66 (0.1)                                1.70 (0.09)
 Weight, kg                                                            72.7 (17.4)                                79.3 (17.3)
 Inclusion Hb, g/L                                                    100.3 (10.6)                                98.8 (13.1)
 Recruitment ferritin, µg/L *                                       24.5 (11.1–37.3)                             23 (10–48.3)
 Recruitment transferrin saturation, % *                             2.9 (2.5–3.3)                               2.8 (2.4–3.3)
 Duration of iron treatment, days *                                  26.5 (15–43)                               23.5 (15–40.5)
 Tumour Features
      Tumour size, mm                                                 48.5 (25.3)                                42.4 (23.2)
      Tumour Stage
          T≤2                                                          1 (6.25%)                                  3 (12.5%)
          T3                                                          10 (62.5%)                                  18 (75%)
          T4                                                          5 (31.25%)                                  3 (12.5%)
      Tumour Location
          Right colon                                                 14 (87.5%)                                  17 (71%)
          Left colon                                                   2 (12.5%)                                   7 (29%)
 Preoperative Risk Assessment
      ASA fitness status classification
          I–II                                                          12 (75%)                                   10 (42%)
          III–IV                                                         4 (25%)                                   14 (58%)
      CR-POSSUM mortality score, % *                                  3.6 (2.8–9.3)                              3.5 (2.6–8.6)
      Continuous variables are presented as mean value (standard deviation) or * median value (interquartile range). Hb, Hemoglobin. CR-
      POSSUM, ColoRectal Physiological and Operative Severity Score for the Enumeration of Mortality and Morbidity. ASA, American Society
      of Anesthesiologists.


                                       2.2. DNA Extraction and 16S rRNA Amplicon Sequencing
                                             Microbial DNA was extracted from colorectal tumor biopsies and paired tumor-
                                       adjacent mucosal colonic tissue biopsies using a modified protocol of Qiagen All Prep
                                       DNA/RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Biopsies were mechanically lysed using
                                       5-mm steel beads (Qiagen) and 0.1-mm Zirconia/Silica beads (Strateck, Suffolk, UK) with
                                       a TissueLyser (Qiagen), followed by enzymatic and heat lysis. Extracted microbial DNA
                                       was used for 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene amplification and sequencing to determine
                                       the mucosal-adherent microbiota according to the Earth Microbiome project protocol [13].
                                       Using primers targeted to the V4 region (515F-806R), the 16S rRNA genes were amplified
                                       in technical triplicates. This was performed using a single-step, single-indexed polymerase
                                       chain reaction (PCR). DNA extraction and 16S rRNA gene PCR were both performed in
                                       batch with appropriate multiple reagent-based negative controls. Paired-end sequencing
                                       (2 × 250 base pairs) was completed in a single batch using the Illumina MiSeq platform
                                       (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA).

                                       2.3. Statistical Analysis
                                            Microbial analysis was performed using the Quantitative Insight into Microbial Ecol-
                                       ogy 2 (QIIME2) pipeline [14]. Bacterial taxonomy was assigned using the Silva-132-99%
                                       operational taxonomic units (OTUs) database [15]. Intra-sample comparisons (α-diversity)
                                       were assessed using the Mann–Whitney U test comparing variation in the abundance-
                                       based coverage estimator (ACE), Chao1, Shannon diversity index, Faith’s phylogenetic
                                       diversity, and observed OTUs. Inter-sample comparisons (β-diversity) were assessed using
                                       permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) comparing Bray–Curtis
                                       dissimilarity and Jaccard similarity using principal coordinate analysis (PCoA). α-diversity
                                       indices and PCoA were plotted using the R package “ggplot2” [16]. Comparison of relative
                                       abundances of taxa between treatment groups and sample types was performed using a
Cancers 2021, 13, 1341                                                                                                  4 of 13




                         linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe); taxa with an LDA score greater than
                         2 with a p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant [17]. Predictive functional
                         profiles from microbial populations were derived using Phylogenetic Investigation of
                         Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States 2 (PICRUSt2), using enzyme classifi-
                         cation pathway analysis. Differences in predictive enzyme abundances were assessed using
                         Statistical Analysis of Metagenomic Profiles (STAMP). Corrected q-values were calculated
                         following multiple testing correction using the Storey false discovery rate. q-values ≤ 0.05
                         between treatment groups were considered statistically significant [18–20].

                         3. Results
                         3.1. On- and Off-Tumor Bacterial Diversity Following Iron Therapy
                              A total of 7.9 million reads (an average of 109,777 reads/sample) and 2367 features
                         were obtained following quality control, and a subsampling depth of 8000 reads/sample
                         was chosen following rarefaction. Comparison of α-diversity metrics shows that patients
                         treated with oral iron have a significantly higher bacterial diversity (Shannon diversity
                         and Faith’s phylogenetic diversity), richness (observed OTUs), and abundance (Chao1
                         and ACE) within their off-tumor microbiota, relative to those treated with intravenous
                         iron therapy (Figure 1; p < 0.05). Consistent with this, Jaccard similarity and Bray–Curtis
                         dissimilarity assessed β-diversity between treatment groups and showed that within the
                         off-tumor microbiota, oral and intravenous iron formed significantly different bacterial
                         community clusters (Figure 2; p < 0.05).




                         Figure 1. On- and off-tumor α-diversity is differentially altered following iron therapy. α-diversity
                         metrics (a) Shannon diversity, (b) abundance-based coverage estimate (ACE), (c) observed operational
                         taxonomic units (OTUs), (d) Faith’s phylogenetic diversity, and (e) Chao1. Off-tumor diversity metrics
                         were significantly greater in oral iron compared to intravenous (IV) treated patients. On-tumor
                         diversity showed no significant differences between oral and IV iron-treated patients (* p ≤ 0.05,
                         ** p ≤ 0.01, ns p > 0.05).
Cancers 2021, 13, 1341                                                                                                    5 of 13




                         Figure 2. β-diversity of oral and intravenous iron-treated patients differs between on- and off-tumor
                         microbiota. Principle coordinate analysis (PCoA) plots based on Jaccard (a,b) and Bray–Curtis
                         (c,d) distances. Plot ellipses represent 95% confidence incidence for group clusters. The off-tumor
                         β-diversity shows significantly distinct bacterial community clusters between oral and intravenous
                         (IV) iron treatments (a; p = 0.046, c; p = 0.027. On-tumour β-diversity shows no significant differences
                         (ns) between iron treatment (b,d).

                              The on-tumor microbiota of these patients showed no differences in α-diversity be-
                         tween iron treatment groups (Figure 1; ns). Along with this, no significant differences in
                         β-diversity were observed (Figure 2: ns). Taken together, this suggests that oral iron and
                         intravenous iron-treated patients show significantly different bacterial diversity in their
                         tumor-adjacent microbiota. However, the tumor-associated microbiota showed a consistent
                         bacterial diversity between iron treatments.

                         3.2. Oral and Intravenous Iron-Treated Patients Show Differing Bacterial Communities
                              Differences in microbial populations between oral and intravenous iron-treated patients
                         were assessed using LEfSe to determine bacterial taxa that are significantly enriched be-
                         tween treatments (Figure 3). The off-tumor microbiota of oral iron-treated patients showed
                         a greater abundance of the Clostridia class, Clostridiales, Anaeroplasmatales, and Cytopha-
                         gales orders, Lactobacillaceae and Anaeroplasmataceae families, and Lactobacillus, Agathobacter,
                         Coprococcus 3, Eubacterium eligens group, Eubacterium xylanophilum group, Lachnospiraceae
                         ND3007 group, Ruminococcaceae NK4A214 group, Ruminococcus 1, Ruminococcus 2, and
                         Anaeroplasma genera, whereas in the intravenous iron group there was a higher abundance
                         of the Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group genus (Figure 3a,b).
Cancers 2021, 13, 1341                                                                                                         6 of 13




      Figure 3. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) comparing iron therapy on bacterial taxa in the on- and
      off-tumor microbiota. LEfSe cladogram and histogram of LDA scores for differentially abundant bacterial taxa between oral
      and intravenous (IV) iron-treated patients in off-tumor (a,b) and on-tumor (c,d) microbiota. Differentially abundant taxa
      from phylum to genus taxonomic levels were included. Taxa and nodes highlighted in green were more abundant in oral
      and red in IV iron-treated patients. Taxa with an LDA > 2 with a p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

                                      The on-tumor microbiota in oral iron-treated patients showed a greater abundance of
                                 the Bacilli class, Lactobacillales order, and Prevotella 7, Butyrivibrio, Coprococcus 1, Hungatella,
                                 Lachnospiraceae ND3007 group, Eubacterium ventriosum group, Ruminococcaceae NK4A214
                                 group, and Pleomorphomonas genera, whereas the on-tumor microbiota of intravenous
                                 iron-treated patients showed a higher abundance of the Alteromonadales order and Al-
                                 loprevotella and Enhydrobacter genera (Figure 3c,d). These results suggest that the on- and
                                 off-tumor microbiota show differential responses to iron therapy with oral iron leading to
                                 a more prominent change in bacterial taxa in the tumor-adjacent compared to the tumor-
                                 associated microbiota.

                                 3.3. Differential Predictive Enzymatic Pathways between Iron Treatment Groups
                                      In order to infer the metagenomic pathways associated with microbial profiles, we
                                 performed a PICRUSt2 metagenomic analysis using predicted enzyme classification abun-
                                 dances based on 16S rRNA bacterial populations. These showed a large difference in pre-
                                 dicted microbial enzymes between iron treatments in the off-tumor microbiota (Figure 4a),
                                 while fewer differences in the on-tumor microbiota were observed (Figure 4b). The off-tumor
                                 microbiota were associated with increased abundance of iron-related enzymes, bacterial
                                 non-heme ferritin, and ferric-chelate reductase, in intravenous iron-treated patients com-
                                 pared to oral iron. Along with this, the off-tumor microbiota of intravenous iron-treated
                                 patients showed an increased abundance of enzymes involved in the production of anti-
                                 inflammatory metabolites, including lactaldehyde dehydrogenase and 2-iminobutanoate/2-
                                 iminopropanoate deaminase (Figure 4a).
Cancers 2021, 13, 1341                                                                                                       7 of 13




      Figure 4. Comparison of predictive metagenomics between iron treatment groups. Predictive metagenomic analysis of
      enzyme classification abundances between oral and intravenous (IV) iron treatments, based on off-tumor (a) and on-tumour
      (b) microbial populations. Corrected q-values were calculated following multiple testing correction using Storey false
      discovery rate. q-values ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

                                      The on-tumor microbiota was associated with an increased abundance of enzymes
                                 involved in anti-inflammatory and colorectal cancer-protective metabolite production,
                                 including cellulose synthase and N-sulfoglucosamine sulfohydrolase, in intravenous iron-
                                 treated patients (Figure 4b). Overall, the predictive metagenomic results suggested that the
                                 on- and off-tumor microbiota profiles associated with intravenous iron-treated patients are
                                 involved in regulating iron metabolism and producing metabolites involved in inhibiting
                                 intestinal inflammatory and colorectal cancer, compared to oral iron-treated patients.

                                 3.4. Paired On- and Off-Tumor Microbiota Show Varying Microbial Communities Following Oral
                                 and Intravenous Iron Therapy
                                      As the tumor-associated and tumor-adjacent microbiota showed differing outcomes
                                 following iron therapy in respect to bacterial taxa, we aimed to assess if the method of iron
                                 administration led to changes between paired on- and off-tumor microbiota (Figure 5a).
                                 Patients treated with oral iron showed their off-tumor microbiota being enriched with the
                                 Bacteroidaceae family and Bacteroides genus, while their on-tumor microbiota showed a higher
                                 abundance of Nocardiaceae, Intrasporangiaceae, and Brevibacteriaceae families and Prevotella 9,
                                 Nocardioides, Kocuria, Brevibacterium, Veillonella, and Catenibacterium genera (Figure 5c,d).
Cancers 2021, 13, 1341                                                                                                          8 of 13




      Figure 5. Paired comparison of on- and off-tumor taxa between treatment groups. LEfSe cladogram and histogram of LDA
      scores for differentially abundant bacterial taxa between on- and off-tumor microbiota in oral (a,b) and intravenous (c,d)
      iron-treated patients. Taxa and nodes highlighted in red were more significant in the off-tumor microbiota and green in the
      on-tumor microbiota. Taxa with an LDA score greater than 2 with a p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

                                       In contrast, patients treated with intravenous iron showed their off-tumor micro-
                                 biota was enriched with the Firmicutes phylum and Clostridia class, along with a greater
                                 abundance of the Clostridiales and Sphingomonadales orders, the Sphingomonadaceae fam-
                                 ily, and the Paraprevotella genus. Whereas the on-tumor microbiota of patients treated
                                 with intravenous iron showed a higher abundance of the Epsilonbacteraeota phylum,
                                 Campylobacteria class, Campylobacterales order, Campylobacteraceae, Propionibacteriaceae
                                 and Porphyromonadaceae families, and Campylobacter, Porphyromonas, and Cutibacterium
                                 genera (Figure 5a,b). These results suggest that patients treated with oral iron had a more
                                 consistent tumor-associated and tumor-adjacent microbiota, showing only small changes
                                 at lower taxonomic levels, whereas patients treated with intravenous iron showed a much
                                 greater difference between their tumor-associated and tumor-adjacent microbiota, with
                                 major differences at the phylum, class, and order levels.

                                  4. Discussion
                                        A high incidence of colorectal cancer-associated iron deficiency leads to the require-
                                  ment of therapeutic iron to correct anemia, with oral iron being the standard treatment
                                  due to low cost and convenience [21,22]. However, oral iron is associated with gastroin-
                                  testinal side-effects and can increase colonic iron concentration, which has been shown to
                                  contribute to oncogenic signaling and colitis [23–25]. However, to our knowledge, this is
                                  the first study to investigate microbial outcomes of oral iron supplementation in anemic
                                  colorectal cancer patients.
                                        This study demonstrates that the on- and off-tumor microbiota shows differential
                                  outcomes following oral and intravenous iron supplementation, demonstrating differ-
                                  ences in α- and β-diversity, bacterial taxa, and predictive metagenomics. We believe the
                                  biological mechanisms underpinning these differences observed relate to the potential
                                  increase in colonic iron concentration following oral iron administration. This increased
Cancers 2021, 13, 1341                                                                                            9 of 13




                         iron availability to colonic bacteria leads to competition for iron required for growth, with
                         pathogenic bacteria having heightened iron acquisition mechanism and outcompeting
                         probiotic bacteria [6]. The colonic iron concentration was not assessed within this study;
                         however, previous studies have shown that oral iron administration leads to significantly
                         greater fecal iron concentration compared to intravenous iron administration, supporting
                         this proposed mechanism [26].
                               Off-tumor bacterial diversity is significantly different between oral and intravenous
                         iron treatments, supporting a defined off-tumor microbial profile following each therapy.
                         A previous study by Thomas et al. [27] showed that α-diversity is significantly increased
                         in rectal cancer-associated microbiota compared to non-cancerous controls, as well as
                         showing differentially β-diversity [27]. This suggests that an increased microbial diversity
                         is potentially required to support cancer. Hence, the increase in off-tumor bacterial diversity
                         in oral iron-treated patients (Figure 1) may be priming the colonic microbiota to support
                         further colonic tumor development. In contrast, the on-tumor microbiota were more
                         consistent between iron treatments, showing no difference in diversity metrics. This may
                         potentially be due to pre-existing tumor microbial alterations, which may prevent oral
                         iron from leading to major shifts in bacterial populations away from the cancer-defined
                         microbiota.
                               On- and off-tumor bacterial genera that were more abundant in oral iron-treated
                         patients include Coprococcus, Prevotella, and Ruminococcus (Figure 3a,b). A previous study by
                         Flemer et al. [28] identified colorectal cancer-enriched microbiota, showing that Coprococcus,
                         Prevotella, and Ruminococcus were all colorectal cancer-enriched genera [28]. Furthermore, a
                         study by Kim et al. [29] found that the genera Ruminococcus 2 and Ruminococcaceae NK4A214
                         group, which were more abundant in oral iron-treated patients (Figure 3a,b), were enriched
                         in colorectal cancer patient, whereas the genus Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group, which was
                         more abundant in intravenous iron-treated patients (Figure 3a), was depleted in colorectal
                         cancer patients [29]. This suggests that oral iron-treated patients have a greater abundance
                         of colorectal cancer-enriched genera, whereas intravenous iron-treated patients have a
                         greater abundance of colorectal cancer-depleted genera, implying oral iron may be utilized
                         by the colonic microbiota promoting the expansion of cancer-associated bacteria that may
                         support tumor development, while inhibiting potentially probiotic bacterial populations.
                         However, what is not stated in these studies is whether these are driver or passenger
                         bacteria in colorectal cancer.
                               Beneficial bacterial genera were differentially enriched between iron treatments, po-
                         tentially including probiotic Lactobacillus which was more abundant in oral iron-treated
                         patients (Figure 3a), whereas anti-inflammatory acetic and butyric acid-producing Allopre-
                         votella and Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group were more abundant in intravenous iron-treated
                         patients (Figure 3a,b) [30–32]. Collectively, the results of our study are consistent with
                         previous findings by Lee et al. [26]. The authors showed that the fecal microbiota of oral
                         and intravenous iron-treated inflammatory bowel disease patients had differential bacterial
                         communities, supporting the results of our study, with the authors suggesting intravenous
                         iron may be more beneficial for treating anemic Crohn’s disease patients, in order to limit
                         microbial perturbations [26].
                               Predictive metagenomics shows the off-tumor microbiota of intravenous iron-treated
                         patients has a greater abundance of bacterial enzymes involved in iron metabolism, com-
                         pared to oral iron (Figure 4). Ferric-chelate reductase is a bacterial enzyme that catalases the
                         reduction of siderophore-bound ferric iron to release ferrous iron [33]. Bacterial non-heme
                         ferritin is a storage protein that binds ferrous iron, keeping it inert intracellularly [34].
                         Collectively, these can contribute to bacterial sequestration of colonic luminal iron. Hence,
                         it is not biologically available to contribute to colonic inflammation and tumor initia-
                         tion in the off-tumor colonic mucosa and potentially also sequesters iron away from the
                         adjacent tumor microenvironment [35]. The off-tumor microbiota of intravenous iron-
                         treated patients also showed an increased abundance of lactaldehyde dehydrogenase
                         and 2-iminobutanoate/2-iminopropanoate deaminase. These bacterial enzymes both con-
Cancers 2021, 13, 1341                                                                                            10 of 13




                         verged in pathways involved in lactate/pyruvate production and isoleucine biosynthesis.
                         These enzymes and pathways are commonly associated with metabolite production in
                         species of the Lachnospiraceae family, including the Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group which is
                         more abundant in intravenous iron treated patients (Figure 3) [32,36]. Lactate and pyru-
                         vate are both anti-inflammatory metabolites that act to limit colonic inflammation [37–39].
                         Likewise, isoleucine has also been shown to inhibit intestinal inflammation, as well as
                         acting to prevent colorectal cancer metastasis [40,41]. The on-tumor microbiota of in-
                         travenous iron-treated patients shows an increased abundance of cellulose synthase and
                         N-sulfoglucosamine sulfohydrolase. Cellulose synthase is a bacterial enzyme that produces
                         cellulose, which can inhibit colonic inflammation through modulating lipid metabolism
                         and inactivating secondary bile acids [42,43]. Many bacteria of the Proteobacteria phylum
                         are involved in bacterial biofilm cellulose production utilizing Cellulose synthase. Bacteria
                         of the Proteobacteria phylum include the Alteromonadales order and Enhydrobacter genus
                         which are both more abundant in the on-tumor microbiota of intravenous iron-treated
                         patients (Figure 3) [44,45]. N-sulfoglucosamine sulfohydrolase produces glucosamine,
                         which is anti-inflammatory and colorectal cancer-protective [46,47]. Collectively, this infers
                         that the on- and off-tumor microbiota in intravenous iron-treated patients is associated
                         with iron sequestration, along with anti-inflammatory and tumor protective metabolite
                         production, compared to oral iron-treated patients. This implies that oral iron treatment
                         potentially leads to a more procarcinogenic microbiota, due to the loss of protective probi-
                         otic bacterial populations that provide anti-oncogenic bacterial metabolites to the tumor
                         microenvironment. However, it is important to note that it remains to be investigated
                         whether the PICRUSt2 results are functional to further confirm the outcome of this study.
                              Comparison of paired on- and off-tumor microbiota shows differentially enriched
                         bacterial taxa in the oral and intravenous iron-treated cohorts (Figure 5). The intravenous
                         iron group shows substantial differences between the on- and off-tumor microbiota at the
                         phylum level. In contrast, patients treated with oral iron show relatively few differences,
                         primarily at the family and genus level. This suggests that oral iron treatment leads to
                         a more consistent microbiota between cancerous and non-cancerous tissue. In contrast,
                         intravenous iron-treated patients’ on- and off-tumor microbiota more relevantly reflect the
                         more diverse bacterial populations typically found between tumor and non-tumor colonic
                         tissue [28]. The clinical relevance of these differences in bacterial populations following
                         each therapy has yet to be determined, but has the potential to be utilized as a future
                         prognostic marker in the management of the disease [48].
                              This pilot study provided novel insights into microbial outcomes of iron therapy
                         in colorectal cancer, suggesting oral iron may be a more deleterious microbial-altering
                         iron therapy, whereas intravenous iron therapy may be more appropriate in this cohort
                         of anemic patients. Despite the relatively small sample size of this study, significant
                         differences were observed between iron treatment groups, which can form the foundation
                         for further large-scale explorative studies. These studies could account for confounding
                         variables, such as diet, which have the potential to lead to differential microbial populations,
                         as well as including comparator colonic mucosal microbiota from healthy controls or pre-
                         iron treatment. The relatively small window of therapeutic intervention in this study may
                         show differential microbial outcomes compared to longer-term iron therapy. Nevertheless,
                         this period relevantly reflects the common clinical intervention in anemic colorectal cancer
                         patients prior to surgery. Furthermore, this study could be further validated through
                         a more comprehensive study of bacterial metabolomics following iron therapy, as well
                         as addressing the clinical relevance of differential microbial communities on long-term
                         outcomes following surgery in these patients.

                         5. Conclusions
                              Collectively, this study suggested that the off-tumor microbiota is variable, depending
                         upon iron supplementation. In contrast, the on-tumor microbiota seem to be more pro-
                         tected from the influence of iron supplementation, potentially due to pre-existing tumor
Cancers 2021, 13, 1341                                                                                                             11 of 13




                                  bacterial dysbiosis. Oral iron-treated patients showed more consistent on- and off-tumor
                                  microbiota, whereas intravenous iron-treated patients showed large differences in bacterial
                                  populations between the on- and off-tumor microbiota. Predictive metagenomics from
                                  this study inferred that oral iron-treated patients have potentially more procarcinogenic
                                  on- and off-tumor microbiota compared to intravenous iron-treated patients. This implies
                                  intravenous iron may be a more beneficial to treat anemia in colorectal cancer patients, in
                                  order to prevent the microbial perturbations associated with oral iron supplementation.
                                  Future work should focus on determining the prognostic relevance of the differential gut
                                  bacterial populations following iron supplementation. This has the potential to allow
                                  the development of probiotic therapies to correct bacterial perturbations and potentially
                                  improve clinical outcomes for colorectal cancer patients following surgery.

                                  Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.O.A.-H., H.S., A.G.A., A.D.B., and M.J.B.; methodology,
                                  H.O.A.-H., M.N.Q., and O.P.; software, O.P. and M.N.Q.; validation, O.P., H.O.A.-H., and M.N.Q.;
                                  formal analysis, O.P. and M.N.Q.; investigation, O.P., H.O.A.-H., and M.N.Q.; resources, O.P., H.O.A.-
                                  H., M.N.Q., A.K., and E.A.D.; data curation, O.P. and M.N.Q.; writing—original draft preparation,
                                  O.P., H.O.A.-H., M.N.Q., and M.J.B.; writing—review and editing, O.P., H.O.A.-H., M.N.Q., E.A.D.,
                                  J.S., H.S., A.K., A.G.A., A.D.B., and M.J.B.; visualization, O.P. and M.N.Q.; supervision, H.O.A.-H.
                                  and M.J.B.; project administration, H.O.A.-H.; funding acquisition, A.G.A. and M.J.B. All authors
                                  have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                   Funding: The Ferinject™ used in the original IVICA trial was donated to all study centers, except
                                   Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, by Vifor Pharma (Glattbrugg, Switzerland). The
                                   study represents independent research funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)
                                   Research for Patient Benefit (RfPB) program (grant number PB-PG-0110-21041). The views expressed
                                   are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Health Service, the NIHR, or the
                                   Department of Health.
                                  Institutional Review Board Statement: Ethical approval for the IVICA trial was granted by the
                                  National Research and Ethics Service (East Midlands—Nottingham 2 Research Ethics Committee,
                                  11/EM/0237). The study was registered with Clinical Trials.Gov (NCT01701310) and the Medicines
                                  and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (2011-002185-21). The study was undertaken in line
                                  with the Declaration of Helsinki.
                                   Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the
                                   study.
                                   Data Availability Statement: The datasets generated and analyzed during the study are available
                                   from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: M.J.B.’s research department received grant support from Tillots Pharma and
                                  Vifor Pharma (Switzerland). M.J.B. received honoraria and travel support for consulting or lecturing
                                  from Vifor Pharma, Tillots Pharma, and Abbvie. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in
                                  the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision
                                  to publish the results.

References
1.    Sánchez-Alcoholado, L.; Ramos-Molina, B.; Otero, A.; Laborda-Illanes, A.; Ordóñez, R.; Medina, J.A.; Gómez-Millán, J.; Queipo-
      Ortuño, M.I. The Role of the Gut Microbiome in Colorectal Cancer Development and Therapy Response. Cancers 2020, 12, 1406.
      [CrossRef]
2.    Tjalsma, H.; Boleij, A.; Marchesi, J.R.; Dutilh, B.E. A Bacterial Driver–passenger Model for Colorectal Cancer: Beyond the Usual
      Suspects. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2012, 10, 575–582. [CrossRef]
3.    Wirth, U.; Garzetti, D.; Jochum, L.M.; Spriewald, S.; Kühn, F.; Ilmer, M.; Lee, S.M.L.; Niess, H.; Bazhin, A.V.; Andrassy, J.; et al.
      Microbiome Analysis from Paired Mucosal and Fecal Samples of a Colorectal Cancer Biobank. Cancers 2020, 12, 3702. [CrossRef]
4.    Weersma, R.K.; Zhernakova, A.; Fu, J. Interaction between Drugs and the Gut Microbiome. Gut 2020, 69, 1510–1519. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
5.    Song, M.; Chan, A.T.; Sun, J. Influence of the Gut Microbiome, Diet, and Environment on Risk of Colorectal Cancer. Gastroenterology
      2020, 158, 322–340. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Cassat, J.E.; Skaar, E.P. Iron in Infection and Immunity. Cell Host Microbe 2013, 13, 509–519. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cancers 2021, 13, 1341                                                                                                                   12 of 13




7.    Phipps, O.; Al-Hassi, H.O.; Quraishi, M.N.; Kumar, A.; Brookes, M.J. Influence of Iron on the Gut Microbiota in Colorectal Cancer.
      Nutrients 2020, 12, 2512. [CrossRef]
8.    Flemer, B.; Herlihy, M.; O’Riordain, M.; Shanahan, F.; O’Toole, P.W. Tumour-Associated and Non-Tumour-Associated Microbiota:
      Addendum. Gut Microbes 2018, 9, 369–373. [CrossRef]
9.    Keeler, B.D.; Simpson, J.A.; Ng, O.; Padmanabhan, H.; Brookes, M.J.; Acheson, A.G.; IVICA Trial Grou. Randomized Clinical Trial of
      Preoperative Oral Versus Intravenous Iron in Anaemic Patients with Colorectal Cancer. Br. J. Surg. 2017, 104, 214–221. [CrossRef]
10.   Richards, T.; Baikady, R.R.; Clevenger, B.; Butcher, A.; Abeysiri, S.; Chau, M.; Macdougall, I.C.; Murphy, G.; Swinson, R.;
      Collier, T.; et al. Preoperative Intravenous Iron to Treat Anaemia before Major Abdominal Surgery (PREVENTT): A Randomised,
      Double-Blind, Controlled Trial. Lancet 2020, 396, 1353–1361. [CrossRef]
11.   Mahalhal, A.; Williams, J.M.; Johnson, S.; Ellaby, N.; Duckworth, C.A.; Burkitt, M.D.; Liu, X.; Hold, G.L.; Campbell, B.J.; Pritchard,
      D.M.; et al. Oral Iron Exacerbates Colitis and Influences the Intestinal Microbiome. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0202460.
12.   Liu, B.; Pan, X.; Liu, Z.; Han, M.; Xu, G.; Dai, X.; Wang, W.; Zhang, H.; Xie, L. Fecal Microbiota as a Noninvasive Biomarker to
      Predict the Tissue Iron Accumulation in Intestine Epithelial Cells and Liver. FASEB J. 2020, 34, 3006–3020. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   Earth Microbiome Project. Illumina 16s PCR Protocols. 2020. Available online: https://www.earthmicrobiome.org/protocols-
      and-standards/16s/ (accessed on 29 June 2020).
14.   Bolyen, E.; Rideout, J.R.; Dillon, M.R.; Bokulich, N.A.; Abnet, C.C.; Al-Ghalith, G.A.; Alexander, H.; Alm, E.J.; Arumugam, M.;
      Asnicar, F.; et al. Reproducible, Interactive, Scalable and Extensible Microbiome Data Science using QIIME 2. Nat. Biotechnol.
      2019, 37, 852–857. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.   Quast, C.; Pruesse, E.; Yilmaz, P.; Gerken, J.; Schweer, T.; Yarza, P.; Peplies, J.; Glöckner, F.O. The SILVA Ribosomal RNA Gene
      Database Project: Improved Data Processing and Web-Based Tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013, 41, D590–D596. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.   Wickham, H. Ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2016; Volume 2020.
17.   Segata, N.; Izard, J.; Waldron, L.; Gevers, D.; Miropolsky, L.; Garrett, W.S.; Huttenhower, C. Metagenomic Biomarker Discovery
      and Explanation. Genome Biol. 2011, 12, R60. [CrossRef]
18.   Langille, M.G.I. Exploring Linkages between Taxonomic and Functional Profiles of the Human Microbiome. mSystems 2018, 3,
      e00163-17. [CrossRef]
19.   Parks, D.H.; Tyson, G.W.; Hugenholtz, P.; Beiko, R.G. STAMP: Statistical Analysis of Taxonomic and Functional Profiles. Bioinformatics
      2014, 30, 3123–3124. [CrossRef]
20.   Storey, J.D. The Positive False Discovery Rate: A Bayesian Interpretation and the Q-Value. Ann. Statist. 2003, 31, 2013–2035. [CrossRef]
21.   Wilson, M.J.; Dekker, J.W.T.; Harlaar, J.J.; Jeekel, J.; Schipperus, M.; Zwaginga, J.J. The Role of Preoperative Iron Deficiency in
      Colorectal Cancer Patients: Prevalence and Treatment. Int. J. Colorectal Dis. 2017, 32, 1617–1624. [CrossRef]
22.   Gereklioglu, C.; Asma, S.; Korur, A.; Erdogan, F.; Kut, A. Medication Adherence to Oral Iron Therapy in Patients with Iron
      Deficiency Anemia. Pak. J. Med. Sci. 2016, 32, 604–607. [CrossRef]
23.   Brookes, M.J.; Boult, J.; Roberts, K.; Cooper, B.T.; Hotchin, N.A.; Matthews, G.; Iqbal, T.; Tselepis, C. A Role for Iron in Wnt
      Signalling. Oncogene 2008, 27, 966–975. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Radulescu, S.; Brookes, M.J.; Salgueiro, P.; Ridgway, R.A.; McGhee, E.; Anderson, K.; Ford, S.J.; Stones, D.H.; Iqbal, T.H.; Tselepis,
      C.; et al. Luminal Iron Levels Govern Intestinal Tumorigenesis After Apc Loss in Vivo. Cell Rep. 2012, 2, 270–282. [CrossRef]
25.   Chua, A.C.G.; Klopcic, B.R.S.; Ho, D.S.; Fu, S.K.; Forrest, C.H.; Croft, K.D.; Olynyk, J.K.; Lawrance, I.C.; Trinder, D. Dietary Iron
      Enhances Colonic Inflammation and IL-6/IL-11-Stat3 Signaling Promoting Colonic Tumor Development in Mice. PLoS ONE 2013,
      8, e78850.
26.   Lee, T.; Clavel, T.; Smirnov, K.; Schmidt, A.; Lagkouvardos, I.; Walker, A.; Lucio, M.; Michalke, B.; Schmitt-Kopplin, P.; Fedorak,
      R.; et al. Oral Versus Intravenous Iron Replacement Therapy Distinctly Alters the Gut Microbiota and Metabolome in Patients
      with IBD. Gut 2017, 66, 863–871. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.   Thomas, A.M.; Jesus, E.C.; Lopes, A.; Aguiar, S., Jr.; Begnami, M.D.; Rocha, R.M.; Carpinetti, P.A.; Camargo, A.A.; Hoffmann, C.;
      Freitas, H.C.; et al. Tissue-Associated Bacterial Alterations in Rectal Carcinoma Patients Revealed by 16S rRNA Community
      Profiling. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2016, 6, 179. [CrossRef]
28.   Flemer, B.; Lynch, D.B.; Brown, J.M.R.; Jeffery, I.B.; Ryan, F.J.; Claesson, M.J.; O’Riordain, M.; Shanahan, F.; O’Toole, P.W.
      Tumour-Associated and Non-Tumour-Associated Microbiota in Colorectal Cancer. Gut 2017, 66, 633–643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.   Kim, D.J.; Yang, J.; Seo, H.; Lee, W.H.; Ho Lee, D.; Kym, S.; Park, Y.S.; Kim, J.G.; Jang, I.; Kim, Y.; et al. Colorectal Cancer Diagnostic
      Model Utilizing Metagenomic and Metabolomic Data of Stool Microbial Extracellular Vesicles. Sci Rep. 2020, 10, 2860. [CrossRef]
30.   Drago, L. Probiotics and Colon Cancer. Microorganisms 2019, 7, 66. [CrossRef]
31.   Ma, Q.; Li, Y.; Wang, J.; Li, P.; Duan, Y.; Dai, H.; An, Y.; Cheng, L.; Wang, T.; Wang, C.; et al. Investigation of Gut Microbiome
      Changes in Type 1 Diabetic Mellitus Rats Based on High-Throughput Sequencing. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2020, 124, 109873. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
32.   Li, H.; Liu, F.; Lu, J.; Shi, J.; Guan, J.; Yan, F.; Li, B.; Huo, G. Probiotic Mixture of Lactobacillus Plantarum Strains Improves Lipid
      Metabolism and Gut Microbiota Structure in High Fat Diet-Fed Mice. Front. Microbiol. 2020, 11, 512. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.   Miethke, M.; Marahiel, M.A. Siderophore-Based Iron Acquisition and Pathogen Control. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2007, 71,
      413–451. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.   Rivera, M. Bacterioferritin: Structure, Dynamics, and Protein–Protein Interactions at Play in Iron Storage and Mobilization. Acc.
      Chem. Res. 2017, 50, 331–340. [CrossRef]
Cancers 2021, 13, 1341                                                                                                              13 of 13




35.   Torti, S.V.; Torti, F.M. Iron and Cancer: More Ore to be Mined. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2013, 13, 342–355. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.   Louis, P.; Flint, H.J. Formation of Propionate and Butyrate by the Human Colonic Microbiota. Environ. Microbiol. 2017, 19, 29–41.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.   Di Costanzo, L.; Gomez, G.A.; Christianson, D.W. Crystal Structure of Lactaldehyde Dehydrogenase from Escherichia Coli and
      Inferences regarding Substrate and Cofactor Specificity. J. Mol. Biol. 2007, 366, 481–493. [CrossRef]
38.   Iraporda, C.; Romanin, D.E.; Bengoa, A.A.; Errea, A.J.; Cayet, D.; Foligné, B.; Sirard, J.; Garrote, G.L.; Abraham, A.G.; Rumbo, M.
      Local Treatment with Lactate Prevents Intestinal Inflammation in the TNBS-Induced Colitis Model. Front. Immunol. 2016, 7, 651.
      [CrossRef]
39.   Algieri, F.; Rodriguez-Nogales, A.; Garrido-Mesa, J.; Camuesco, D.; Vezza, T.; Garrido-Mesa, N.; Utrilla, P.; Rodriguez-Cabezas,
      M.E.; Pischel, I.; Galvez, J. Intestinal Anti-Inflammatory Activity of Calcium Pyruvate in the TNBS Model of Rat Colitis:
      Comparison with Ethyl Pyruvate. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2016, 103, 53–63. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.   Murata, K.; Moriyama, M. Isoleucine, an Essential Amino Acid, Prevents Liver Metastases of Colon Cancer by Antiangiogenesis.
      Cancer Res. 2007, 67, 3263–3268. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.   Konno, Y.; Ashida, T.; Inaba, Y.; Ito, T.; Tanabe, H.; Maemoto, A.; Ayabe, T.; Mizukami, Y.; Fujiya, M.; Kohgo, Y. Isoleucine,
      an Essential Amino Acid, Induces the Expression of Human B Defensin 2 through the Activation of the G-Protein Coupled
      Receptor-ERK Pathway in the Intestinal Epithelia. Food Nutr. Sci. 2012, 3, 548–555. [CrossRef]
42.   Kim, Y.; Hwang, S.W.; Kim, S.; Lee, Y.; Kim, T.; Lee, S.; Kim, S.J.; Yoo, H.J.; Kim, E.N.; Kweon, M. Dietary Cellulose Prevents Gut
      Inflammation by Modulating Lipid Metabolism and Gut Microbiota. Gut Microbes 2020, 11, 944–961. [CrossRef]
43.   Chen, H.; Lin, Y.; Wang, Y. Comparative Effects of Cellulose and Soluble Fibers (Pectin, Konjac Glucomannan, Inulin) on Fecal
      Water Toxicity Toward Caco-2 Cells, Fecal Bacteria Enzymes, Bile Acid, and Short-Chain Fatty Acids. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2010,
      58, 10277–10281. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.   Augimeri, R.V.; Varley, A.J.; Strap, J.L. Establishing a Role for Bacterial Cellulose in Environmental Interactions: Lessons Learned
      from Diverse Biofilm-Producing Proteobacteria. Front. Microbiol. 2015, 6, 1282. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.   Premalatha, N.; Gopal, N.O.; Jose, P.A.; Anandham, R.; Kwon, S. Optimization of Cellulase Production by Enhydrobacter Sp.
      ACCA2 and its Application in Biomass Saccharification. Front. Microbiol. 2015, 6, 1046. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.   Kantor, E.D.; Lampe, J.W.; Navarro, S.L.; Song, X.; Milne, G.L.; White, E. Associations between Glucosamine and Chondroitin
      Supplement use and Biomarkers of Systemic Inflammation. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 2014, 20, 479–485. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.   Kantor, E.D.; Newton, C.C.; Giovannucci, E.L.; McCullough, M.L.; Campbell, P.T.; Jacobs, E.J. Glucosamine use and Risk of
      Colorectal Cancer: Results from the Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort. Cancer Causes Control 2018, 29, 389–397.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.   Koliarakis, I.; Athanasakis, E.; Sgantzos, M.; Mariolis-Sapsakos, T.; Xynos, E.; Chrysos, E.; Souglakos, J.; Tsiaoussis, J. Intestinal
      Microbiota in Colorectal Cancer Surgery. Cancers 2020, 12, 3011. [CrossRef]
