                                                                                         Chapter 16

Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome
in Cancer Research
Elisa Morales, Jun Chen, and K. Leigh Greathouse


Abstract
Gut microbial composition has shown to be associated with obesity, diabetes mellitus, inflammatory bowel
disease, colitis, autoimmune disorders, and cancer, among other diseases. Microbiome research has signifi-
cantly evolved through the years and continues to advance as we develop new and better strategies to more
accurately measure its composition and function. Careful selection of study design, inclusion and exclusion
criteria of participants, and methodology are paramount to accurately analyze microbial structure. Here we
present the most up-to-date available information on methods for gut microbial collection and analysis.

     Key words Metagenomic sequencing, Gut microbiota, Taxonomic classification, Cancer research



1    Introduction

                                Health-related microbiome research has increased exponentially as
                                we discover the influence of the microbiome on diseases not previ-
                                ously recognized to have a microbial component. Certain cancers,
                                for example, are known to have a microbial origin, but methods to
                                comprehensively examine the microbiome in relationship to cancer
                                have been hindered until recently. Methodologies to analyze the
                                microbiome are quickly evolving to provide the best techniques in
                                order to expand our understanding of the relationship between the
                                microbiome and diseases. The main objective of this chapter is to
                                provide general guidelines of existing methods as well as important
                                points to consider when conducting microbiome research (espe-
                                cially focused on gut microbiota). The first part of this chapter will
                                focus on microbial ecology and its evolution to provide the reader
                                with a general background before engaging in metagenomic appli-
                                cations to cancer biology. The second part of this chapter involves a
                                comprehensive overview of experimental methods as well as several
                                step-by-step procedures on sampling, storage, handling, nucleotide
                                extraction, PCR amplification, and gene sequencing of the human
                                microbiome.

Majda Haznadar (ed.), Cancer Metabolism: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 1928,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-9027-6_16, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2019

                                                          299
300     Elisa Morales et al.

1.1 Microbial              A sequence of key discoveries marked the evolution of microbiol-
Ecology History            ogy, beginning with the creation of microscopes and expanding to
                           the application of microbiology in personalized medicine. Key
                           observations demonstrate that trillions of microbes in and on our
                           bodies play relevant roles in health and disease at multiple body sites
                           such as the oral cavity, the gut, the skin, the reproductive tract, and
                           the respiratory tract [1].
                               The complex and adaptable microbial communities in the
                           human body interact with each other by exchanging nutrients,
                           genetic information, and chemical signals [1]. The study of the
                           interactions of microorganisms with their environment, also
                           known as microbial ecology, has recently received increased atten-
                           tion due to the advent of next-generation sequencing technology.
                           Prior to this advance, species identification required the organism
                           to grow in a pure culture (culture-dependent); however, early
                           bacterial cultures were monogenic, preventing any conclusion
                           being drawn at the ecosystem level [2]. Furthermore, in 1987,
                           Brock discovered that the activity of organisms cultivated in labora-
                           tories may not necessarily reflect their activity in situ [3]. Supporting
                           Brock’s theory, Amann et al. demonstrated that a good portion of
                           the microorganisms in the environment do not survive cultivation
                           [4]. These observations highlighted the inability of culture-
                           dependent approaches to describe microbial diversity and activity.
                           Thus, the need for culture-independent approaches to determine
                           microbial composition surpassed the capabilities of microbial culti-
                           vation. To capture the full biological and environmental influence
                           on host-associated microbial communities, it is crucial to further
                           our knowledge by studying microbial communities in their natural
                           habitats, constrained to their host’s biochemical and physiological
                           context.
                               When Carl Woese and George Fox proposed a new domain,
                           Archaea, they ushered forth a new strategy for microbial evolution
                           using phylogenetic taxonomy of the 16S rRNA gene [5]. Research-
                           ers have since taken advantage of the presence of both conserved
                           and variable regions in the 16S rRNA gene. By amplifying variable
                           regions, researchers can easily classify bacteria within their clades
                           (discussed in detail in a later section). The first culture-independent
                           approach utilizing phylogenetic taxonomy of the 16S rRNA gene
                           was introduced in the 1980s allowing the extraction, amplification,
                           cloning, and characterization of 16S rRNA genes obtained directly
                           from the natural environment [6]. Analysis of 16S rRNA set the
                           stage for high-throughput sequencing, which allows identification
                           of entire bacterial communities within hours.
                   Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research     301

1.2 The Evolution of    Metagenomics involves the culture-independent, genome-level
Microbial Ecology       characterization of microbial communities by using high-
Composition and         throughput sequencing analyses. Metagenomics overcomes the
Function Assessment     biggest obstacle in microbiology by being able to assess the high
with Metagenomic        diversity of uncultivated viable and nonviable microbes. “Metage-
Sequencing              nomics” and “functional metagenomics” are derived from “tradi-
                        tional genomics” and “functional genomics,” respectively. While
                        traditional genomics focuses on sequencing individual genomes,
                        metagenomics aims at characterizing the genes at the community
                        level. Furthermore, functional genomics assesses the function of
                        the genome at the organism level, while “functional metage-
                        nomics” evaluates the function of the genes present in a community
                        [1]. In the following paragraphs, we will describe two common
                        techniques used to profile polymicrobial communities: 16S rRNA
                        gene sequencing and whole genome sequencing (WGS). For meth-
                        odological purposes, however, we will focus mainly on methods
                        used in analysis of the 16S rRNA gene.
                             A metagenomic approach that is commonly utilized as the first
                        step in pilot and larger metagenomic projects is the analysis of the
                        16S ribosomal RNA gene or 16S rRNA. Sequencing the
                        non-conserved regions of this gene is used to analyze phylogenetic
                        taxonomy and monitor changes over time in a particular commu-
                        nity. Although 16S rRNA gene analysis provides information about
                        the structure and composition of the microbial community, it only
                        delivers inferences (based on marker genes) about the functional
                        capabilities (metabolic potential). To overcome this shortcoming,
                        shotgun DNA or whole genome sequencing (WGS) and RNA
                        sequencing (RNA-seq) are used to reveal more detailed informa-
                        tion about community diversity and function as compared to 16S
                        rRNA gene analyses [1]. Next-generation sequencing (NGS), also
                        called massive parallel sequencing, encompasses these technologies
                        and can determine an entire human genome by sequencing millions
                        of small DNA fragments at a time. These fragments are joined
                        together by comparing to a reference human genome using bioin-
                        formatic techniques to build a complete genome. Similarly, NGS
                        can be used to sequence entire genomes of polymicrobial commu-
                        nities or can be constrained to individual species of interest, which
                        include 16S rRNA gene, WGS, and RNA-seq [2, 7, 8]. Although at
                        a higher cost, WGS and RNA-seq can provide more in-depth
                        information regarding the composition and metabolic potential of
                        the microbial communities in comparison to 16S rRNA gene anal-
                        ysis. Further, these types of sequencing, as well as full-length 16S
                        rRNA sequencing, overcome the drawback of using individual 16S
                        rRNA variable regions to enable species- and strain-level
                        information.
                             Microbial functionality can be further analyzed by using “meta-
                        transcriptomics” (analysis of the RNA transcripts from the micro-
                        organisms present in an ecosystem (RNA-seq)), “metabolomics”
302     Elisa Morales et al.

                           (analysis of the metabolites from the microorganisms present in an
                           ecosystem), and/or “metaproteomics” (analysis of the proteins
                           produced by the microorganisms present in an ecosystem). None-
                           theless, the instability, short half-life of RNA, and the low correla-
                           tion between RNA transcript levels and the synthesis of its
                           corresponding proteins have lowered the use of metatranscrip-
                           tomics. Whereas, proteomics has advanced quickly by using mass
                           spectrometry, which allows rapid and precise protein identification
                           [1, 7]. Nevertheless, the integration of “omic” disciplines has the
                           potential to link genetic structure to functional diversity [9, 10].

1.3 Metagenomic            Research into drug sensitivity, metabolic mutations, sources of
Sequencing                 infection outbreaks, and cancer detection, among others, are
Applications in Cancer     some of the medical uses of NGS, and the decrease in cost of
Biology                    sequencing will continue to increase its use in medicine and cancer
                           research [8, 11]. With the commercialization of NGS in 2005,
                           cancer medicine has experienced numerous advances in early detec-
                           tion and treatment using molecular profiling [12]. More recently,
                           however, we have started to apply this technology to microbial
                           associated diseases, including cancer. While we have known for
                           decades that specific microbial species are causing cancer (e.g.,
                           H. pylori and gastric cancer), less has been understood about the
                           contribution of polymicrobial communities or biofilms not only to
                           cancer initiation but also to cancer promotion, progression, or
                           metastasis [13–15]. The application of metagenomics to the field
                           of cancer biology, however, has dramatically expanded the research
                           questions investigators can now address. Multiple lines of evidence
                           show alterations in the microbiome are associated with both devel-
                           opment and progression of several types of cancer including liver,
                           esophageal, and colon cancer [16–21]. With metagenomics we can
                           more fully understand how the structure of the bacterial commu-
                           nity determines the function and health of the epithelium and the
                           immune system [22, 23]. For example, putative microbial initiators
                           of colon cancer, specifically B. fragilis (ETBF), E. coli (pks+), and
                           E. faecalis, are more prevalent in human tumors and/or those with
                           familial adenomatous polyposis as compared to healthy controls
                           [24–28]. These findings and those from similar studies were
                           revealed through a combination of large metagenomic studies of
                           multiple cohorts and murine models to link associations with
                           molecular mechanism. Further, several bacteria have been identi-
                           fied through metagenomic sequencing as promoters of colon can-
                           cer development, including Fusobacterium nucleatum, which has
                           been isolated from patients with inflammatory bowel disease, a risk
                           factor for colon cancer [29, 30]. Building on these findings, recent
                           attempts to generate a classifier for distinguishing normal colon
                           from colon adenocarcinoma using the fecal microbiome in combi-
                           nation with the FOBT or FIT test have shown promise in improv-
                           ing screening for early detection of colon cancer [31].
                      Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research         303

                                Response to anticancer therapy has also shown to be reliant
                           upon both the immune system and microbiota composition in
                           animal and human studies [23]. Using 16S rRNA sequencing,
                           Iida et al. (2013) observed that destruction of the microbiome in
                           mice through use of antibiotics resulted in a compromised efficacy
                           of immunotherapy (anti-IL-10/CpG-OGN) and platinum-based
                           chemotherapeutics (e.g., oxaliplatin) [32]. Therefore, the com-
                           mensal microbiota was recognized as necessary for the cytotoxic
                           effects of oxaliplatin. With the advent of checkpoint inhibitors for
                           anticancer therapy against PD-1/PD-L1 and CTLA4, studies have
                           focused on determining the influence of the microbiome in thera-
                           peutic efficacy [33]. Building on these studies, Gopalakrishnan
                           et al. [23] used metagenomics to characterize baseline fecal samples
                           from melanoma patients undergoing immunotherapy (e.g., anti-
                           PD-1). They used 16S rRNA sequencing to obtain microbial com-
                           munity composition and predict responders and nonresponders,
                           demonstrating the power of the microbiome and metagenomics
                           to uncover clinically pertinent information. Thus, mounting evi-
                           dence indicates that specific microbial species and community states
                           play a role in the etiology and treatment outcome of several types of
                           cancer and that precise methods for analyzing these microbial
                           populations are required. Hence, the remainder of this chapter
                           will focus on delineating those methods.

1.4 Study Design,          Multiple factors can affect the results of human microbiome stud-
Sampling, Storage,         ies. The greatest sources of variability leading to spurious results
and Handling               come from study design, nucleotide extraction, and statistical anal-
Protocols for Fecal        ysis methods [34, 35]. Therefore, this section will focus on these
Collection                 most salient factors and provide suggestions for additional
                           resources and readings for factors not addressed. For a comprehen-
                           sive overview of microbiome study design and analysis, see the
                           review by Mallick et al. [10].
                                One of the initial steps in studies involving the human micro-
                           biota is determining the study design, which includes proper iden-
                           tification of the inclusion and exclusion criteria, as well as careful
                           calculation of sample size. Some of the key issues to consider when
                           selecting the inclusion and exclusion criteria for microbiome stud-
                           ies are age, current and past medication use (especially antibiotics),
                           diet, hormonal status, smoking status, recent GI infections, geo-
                           graphical location, and even physical activity levels. Since all of these
                           factors can have an impact on the gut microbiota, they should be
                           either considered in the inclusion/exclusion criteria or statistically
                           controlled [36–39]. Determining the effect of age is fundamental
                           as children under 3 years old have a relatively unstable gut micro-
                           biota that diversifies and stabilizes as the child gets older, with a
                           slight decrease in older stages of life [40]. One of the strongest
                           factors that contributes to confounding results is antibiotic use;
                           having consumed antibiotics alters the gut microbiota from
304   Elisa Morales et al.

                         6 months up to 4 years before it recovers its initial composition
                         [41]. In addition to antibiotics, proton pump inhibitors and the
                         diabetic drug metformin are able to significantly modify the com-
                         position of the gut bacteria [42, 43].
                              When evaluating the longitudinal effects of specific factors that
                         influence microbial community, careful selection of appropriate
                         controls should be put in place in order to differentiate between
                         normal variation from baseline and actual change [1, 44]. For
                         example, stronger conclusions can be made when participants act
                         as their own control, such as when comparing participants diag-
                         nosed with a relapsing disease in longitudinal studies. Nonetheless,
                         when this design is not possible, between group comparisons are
                         also informative, given enough participants are sampled and appro-
                         priate controls are selected [45]. Between group comparisons
                         require the careful selection of the interest and control groups
                         with as many similar characteristics as possible (age, gender, physi-
                         cal activity level, energy intake, body composition, etc.) with
                         exemption of the variable(s) of interest. Controlling for extraneous
                         variables preferentially with study design or at least statically
                         decreases their potential confounding effect on target variables. If
                         the species of interest are already known, selection of the appropri-
                         ate study design, nucleotide extraction, and statistical analysis will
                         be simplified.
                              It is also essential to achieve enough power to detect real
                         changes in the variables of interest, which can be accomplished by
                         determining the appropriate sample size. Underpowered studies
                         can cause spurious associations that cannot be replicated by studies
                         with enough power. This has been observed, for example, in studies
                         attempting to demonstrate the ability of the microbiome to distin-
                         guish between obese and nonobese individuals [46]. Factors, such
                         as the complexity of the community, the heterogeneity of the
                         habitat over time and space, and the specificity of the results that
                         need to be inferred, determine the correct selection of the sample
                         size. Software to help estimate sample size is available with the
                         following R packages [47–49].
                              Although logical, it is also important to highlight that, if con-
                         clusions are to be drawn for a specific microbial community, the
                         sample must be representative of that community’s particular habi-
                         tat. Community representativeness can be achieved by knowing the
                         amplitude of microbial variation; the more variation in an environ-
                         ment and the lower microbial biomass (e.g., total microbial load),
                         the higher the sample size needed. Performing pilot studies (e.g.,
                         16S rRNA sequencing) is useful in order to assess diversity and
                         variability, which in turn aids in determining sample size [1].
                              Microbial communities readily share genetic information and
                         have rapid communication systems; consequently, dramatic shifts in
                         community structure can occur within hours to days [50]. Thus,
                         timing can affect the interpretation of microbial analyses. This
Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research        305

     recommendation is critical in studies involving individuals with
     cancer undergoing treatment as bowel preparation for surgery,
     prophylactic antibiotics, and chemo- and radiotherapy significantly
     affect the microbiome. To overcome this issue, it is crucial to
     sample at multiple times.
          Lastly, location can also be a confounder; in gut microbiota
     analysis, for example, repeated sampling from different sites of the
     same stool or from different spatial locations in the colon or lung
     can lead to variation in microbiota composition [1, 44]. Homogeni-
     zation of the stool sample can overcome this bias. Thus, it is crucial
     to control for or keep location/site constant within and between
     samples.
          When evaluating different sampling methods, it is paramount
     to consider the reproducibility, stability, and accuracy of each of the
     methods to compare, especially if conducting studies at multiple
     geographical locations. Accuracy in this context means that the
     sampling method must conserve the microbial signature of the
     sample. Ideally, one would also want the method to be stable
     under suboptimal field conditions and to be useful for multiple
     different analyses (transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics,
     etc.) [51]. Several recent studies comparing microbial sampling
     methods have highlighted the importance of understanding the
     potential limitations of each method depending on the outcome
     of interest. Among the different methodological steps in micro-
     biota analysis, nucleotide extraction has the most impact on results
     and will be further discussed later in this section [34, 35].
          Also crucial is to avoid spurious or incorrect conclusions by
     carefully evaluating microbial sampling methodology in order to
     increase the researchers’ ability to obtain valid and reliable data that
     can be compared against other studies [34, 51, 52]. For large
     population studies, three collection and storage methods appear
     most prudent: FOBT/FTA cards, 95% ethanol, and premade
     homogenization collection tubes. Comparison of seven fecal sam-
     pling methods, (1) no additive, (2) RNAlater, (3) 70% ethanol,
     (4) EDTA, (5) dry swab, (6) predevelopment FOBT (fecal occult
     blood test), and (7) post-development FOBT, showed that the use
     of swabs, FOBT cards (both pre and post), and 70% ethanol pro-
     duced the most accurate microbial diversity measures. However,
     70% ethanol resulted in low microbiome stability, rendering an
     unstable sample across time. Likewise, although RNAlater seemed
     to stabilize the microbiome over time, it caused considerable mod-
     ifications to the microbiota diversity, causing a change in the micro-
     bial signature. Thus, according to this study, FOBT cards and swabs
     appear to be the best of these seven storing options [51].
          FOBT consist of cards with fecal samples smeared on them,
     collected by using a stick and flushable tissue paper. The smeared
     sample in the card dries after a couple of minutes making it easy to
     transport and store at lower cost. Alternatively, rectal swabs consist
306   Elisa Morales et al.

                         of sterile moistened swabs that are inserted 1–2 cm passing the anal
                         sphincter (rotating the swab 360 ). Swabs are then stored in their
                         original container with liquid medium and stored at 80  C. Rectal
                         swabs can be collected at any time, require no patient preparation,
                         and can be easily transported within the hospital; however, amount
                         of sample obtained is usually a potential limitation for this
                         method [52].
                              Commercial storage vials, such as OMNIgene Gut kit and
                         ZYMO DNA/RNA Shield—fecal collection tubes—are now avail-
                         able. OMNIgene Gut kits have been used extensively in large
                         population studies and have shown to effectively maintain micro-
                         biota composition by stabilizing nucleotides without the need of
                         freezing. An advantage of this device is its stabilization buffer and
                         the presence of a metal ball for complete homogenization. This
                         method can potentially remove the inconvenient need to store stool
                         samples in donors’ freezers which is advantageous in several ways: it
                         (1) eliminates the hazard of placing tubes with stool samples in
                         house freezers, (2) reduces temperature fluctuations caused by the
                         automatic defrost cycles that home freezers undergo, and
                         (3) decreases the cost of transportation as there is no need for dry
                         ice [44, 53].
                              A recent study evaluated the efficiency of OMNIgene Gut kit
                         (DNA Genotek), RNAlater, FTA cards (Flinders Technology
                         Associates cards from Whatman, similar product to FOBT cards),
                         and 70% as well as 95% ethanol [54]. The authors demonstrated
                         that 95% ethanol, FTA cards, and the OMNIgene Gut kit are able
                         to efficiently preserve stool samples at ambient temperature for up
                         to 8 weeks. The similarity between the preservation in the micro-
                         biota signature caused by 95% ethanol in comparison to OMNI-
                         gene Gut kit and FTA cards and the low cost and global accessibility
                         of ethanol makes it a suitable choice for microbiome research.
                         However, despite the fact that ethanol preserved DNA with high
                         reliability, its use yielded lower concentrations of DNA in compari-
                         son to OMNIgene Gut kit and FTA cards. FTA cards and OMNI-
                         gene kit resulted in microbial community changes that are similar
                         to those observed between technical replicates, thus suggesting
                         that any changes over time produced by these two methods are
                         within the limits of variation produced by 16S rRNA gene analysis.
                         Caution against the use of 70% ethanol is given as it produces
                         changes in the microbial community comparable in proportion to
                         the ones observed between species. Additionally, although RNAla-
                         ter was found to perform similarly to the other methods, it began
                         losing stability after 2 weeks when maintained above freezing tem-
                         peratures [54]. Nonetheless, it is important to highlight that all of
                         these methods were compared based on the efficiency and stability
                         analyzed through 16S rRNA gene sequencing; whether this inter-
                         pretation applies for whole genome sequencing, RNA sequencing,
                         or any other analysis is the focus of ongoing studies.
                        Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research       307

                                  Nucleic acid extraction on fresh samples is the best way to
                             ensure conservation of the microbial signature from the sample;
                             however this is highly impractical and sometimes impossible in
                             large population studies. Freezing the samples at 80  C immedi-
                             ately after collection is still considered the reference method to
                             compare new alternatives for sample collection. When freezing
                             the samples directly at 80  C is not possible, methods such as
                             freezing the sample at 20  C or storing them at 4  C for up to
                             48–72 h have shown to prevent from significant alterations in the
                             microbiota. However, if the study design does not allow immediate
                             storage at 80  C, 20  C, or 4  C due to geographical distance or
                             other issues, the use of FOBT cards, OMNIgene kits, and rectal
                             swabs is the next, best option [51, 52, 55, 56]. Several authors,
                             however, suggest that even in cases where immediate freezing is
                             available, other options such as OMNIgene kits, FTA cards, and
                             95% ethanol should be considered as they provide good stability
                             and increased protection from freeze-thaw cycles, which normally
                             occur during shipment and sample processing [54]. This recom-
                             mendation is also supported by changes in the Firmicutes/Bacter-
                             oidetes ratio observed in frozen, unfixed stool samples in
                             comparison to fresh samples. This change in bacterial composition
                             under freezing temperatures seems to be caused by the greater
                             ability of gram-positive bacteria (Firmicutes) to preserve DNA
                             stability in comparison to gram-negative bacteria [57]. This error
                             can be fully or partially addressed by (1) directly analyzing the fresh
                             samples, (2) freezing all the samples the same amount of time, or
                             (3) using another reliable storing method that can keep the micro-
                             bial signature stable for a short period of time at ambient
                             temperature.

1.5 Sample                   Cultivation-dependent methods have provided a valuable but
Preparation and              incomplete picture of the human microbiome. Cultivation-
Nucleotide Extraction        independent approaches that involve the extraction of genomic
                             DNA represent a more accurate depiction of the microbial commu-
                             nity [58]. One of the key steps in analyzing microbial DNA is
                             nucleotide extraction, as it has shown to have the second largest
                             effect on metagenomic analysis after biological differences
                             [35]. When choosing a DNA extraction protocol, it is important
                             to select a method that is able to extract as much genetic material as
                             possible without causing DNA damage [44]. Extraction of high-
                             quality, high-molecular-weight DNA is necessary for techniques
                             such as shotgun metagenomics; however, proper lysis of heteroge-
                             neous microbial communities without damaging their genomes is a
                             major challenge. Human samples contain large numbers of micro-
                             bial cells that belong to different phyla, heterogeneous in their
                             morphology and cellular architecture. This heterogeneity narrows
                             the potential options for ideal extraction methods; protocols can-
                             not be too harsh that can damage DNA quality or too weak that
308   Elisa Morales et al.

                         cause only partial cellular lysis [58]. Maximizing DNA concentra-
                         tion while minimizing its fragmentation is a key factor to consider
                         when choosing an extraction protocol. Extraction of high-quality
                         DNA is needed to prevent misrepresentation of community com-
                         position and to perform posterior analyses with more in-depth
                         techniques such as shotgun sequencing [35]. Studies analyzing
                         the efficiency of different DNA extraction protocols have mainly
                         focused on measuring DNA yield as an outcome; however, research
                         has shown a lack of correlation between DNA yield and accurate
                         representation of the microbial diversity [58]. Thus, we cannot
                         guarantee that methods that ensure high DNA yield will necessarily
                         produce good representation of the microbial community
                         [58]. Therefore, a key challenge in sequencing metagenomics is
                         to isolate DNA that are both high quality and representative of the
                         sampled community, which is the focus of this section.
                              It has been shown that separate locations within the same fecal
                         sample can produce different microbial readings; thus, the first step
                         in fecal sample analysis involves the homogenization of samples.
                         Homogenization before storage reduces within-sample and intrain-
                         dividual variability, which becomes crucial when performing longi-
                         tudinal studies [59, 60]. Homogenization by either a blender or a
                         pneumatic mixer has shown to increase the proportion of gram-
                         positive bacteria, with the former method requiring only 2 min in
                         comparison to 10–30 min of the latter one [60].
                              Analyzing human fecal samples is complex due to the presence
                         of fibers, microbes, undigested particles, nucleases, and human
                         cells; these factors can affect the overall quality and quantity of
                         the metagenomic DNA obtained [61]. Removal of large size insol-
                         uble impurities takes place after homogenization, producing clean
                         microbial pellets.
                              Once the fecal sample has been homogenized and cleaned from
                         impurities, a lysis buffer and proteinases are then added to the
                         sample [61]. Lysis of microbial cells exposes their genomic DNA
                         to intra- and extracellular nucleases making DNA susceptible to
                         exo- and endonucleases. Therefore, it is crucial to inactivate
                         nucleases and other enzymes by adding strong denaturing agents
                         [62]. A couple of thermal incubations, washes, and centrifugation
                         cycles follow the procedure in order to obtain DNA with good
                         integrity (>1.8 kb) and purity (A260/A280 >1.85; A260/A230
                         ~2.0–2.2) [63].
                              Methods that combine physical (thermal), mechanical (bead
                         beating), and chemical lysis to isolate community bacterial DNA
                         from human samples appear to be more efficient in obtaining good-
                         quality DNA than methods utilizing only one of them [62]. Specifi-
                         cally, protocols that include bead beating and/or mutanolysin pro-
                         duce the closest representation of the bacterial community. Bead
                         beating produces a mechanical disruption of the microbial cells that
                         increases DNA recovery, specifically from gram-positive bacteria
Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research        309

     which are difficult to lyse by enzymatic methods due to the strength
     of their cell walls, while mutanolysin creates cellular lysis through
     enzymatic reactions [35, 58, 60]. Protocols assessing the lysis
     efficiency of different lytic methods demonstrate that combining
     enzymes is superior than using individual enzymes to achieve more
     effective lyses of cell membranes. This might be due to the different
     structures of membrane peptidoglycans among bacterial species.
     C-type lysozyme, for example, cleaves the glycosidic bond between
     the C-1 of N-acetylmuramic acid and the C-4 of N-acetylglucosa-
     mine in bacterial peptidoglycans [62]. However, not all bacteria are
     sensitive to C-type lysozymes. Bacteria that have O-acetylated pep-
     tidoglycan (such as S. aureus and Proteus mirabilis) are sensitive to
     mutanolysin instead [64]. Lysostaphin is a glycylglycine endopep-
     tidase that is able to cleave pentaglycine bridges in the cell wall of
     staphylococci. Therefore, using a cocktail of lytic enzymes can likely
     improve the cell lysis of different bacterial species, thus allowing for
     a better representation of bacterial communities [58, 65, 66].
          Slight variations in DNA extraction protocols can impact DNA
     isolation and thus DNA sequencing. The European MetaHIT and
     the American Human Microbiome Project (HMP) are two major
     consortiums on microbiota studies. A recent study comparing the
     DNA extraction methods used by these two consortiums demon-
     strated that, although both DNA extraction methods resulted in
     sufficient yields and purity, a more efficient eukaryotic DNA extrac-
     tion was achieved with the MetaHIT protocol; however, a more
     efficient bacterial DNA extraction was obtained with the HMP
     protocol. Both protocols involve comparable procedures for bead
     beating (same size); however, one of the main variations between
     the protocols is the different heat treatments (70  C for 1–2 h in the
     MetaHIT method compared to 65  C for 10 min followed by other
     10 min at 95  C in the HMP method). Interestingly, the study
     shows that although there was a high correlation between the two
     methods, samples that were extracted with the same DNA extrac-
     tion method tended to cluster together in analysis, highlighting the
     impact of the method used on the detected composition of the
     sample. Last but not the least, when analyzing a large number of
     samples, it is important to consider the extra amount of labor
     involved in the protocol. In this case the MetaHIT protocol is
     more time-consuming than the HMP protocol [59].
          After cellular lysis takes place, metagenomic DNA is then
     isolated to be later visualized by agarose gel and quantified by
     spectrophotometry. Metagenomic DNA refers to the DNA
     extracted from all microbes existent in a particular environment
     [1]. The majority of studies use one or multiple regions of the 16S
     rRNA to perform sequencing; however, this technique can be
     affected by the choice of primer used, PCR biases, and even the
     selected polymerase. Comparing methods by using shotgun
310   Elisa Morales et al.

                         metagenomics sequencing as a readout can overcome these poten-
                         tial sources of bias [35].
                              All of the steps involved in sample preparation and nucleotide
                         extraction are potential sources of bias, creating major challenges
                         when trying to compare microbiota studies [44]. Adoption of a
                         DNA extraction protocol that is universally considered as the “gold
                         standard” is fundamental to improve the comparability of human
                         studies analyzing the microbiome. Collaboration of 21 laboratories
                         in 11 countries on 3 continents made possible the comparison of
                         21 commercial and noncommercial DNA extraction methods
                         [35]. In the first phase of the study, 5 methods were selected out
                         of the 21 considering the quantity and integrity of extracted DNA,
                         recovered diversity, and observed ratio of gram-positive bacteria
                         obtained through shotgun metagenomic sequencing. Gram-
                         positive bacteria were used as an outcome criterion for comparison
                         between protocols, as they are more likely to be affected by the
                         extraction method. Their results demonstrate that protocol Q is the
                         preferred option for DNA extraction considering its ease of use,
                         higher extraction quality, accuracy, and transferability in compari-
                         son to the rest of the selected protocols [35]. Protocol Q is further
                         explained in “Steps for DNA Extraction.”
                              Important considerations when performing DNA extraction
                         involve the inclusion of positive and negative controls to evaluate
                         the overall performance of extraction protocols. Positive controls
                         should include known artificial communities (known as mock com-
                         munities) to measure the overall accuracy (error rates of sequencing
                         and composition) of the protocol. Negative controls should be
                         included throughout extraction (e.g., PCR clean water and Tris-
                         HCl buffer) in order to evaluate potential contamination
                         [34]. Contamination sources include molecular grade water, PCR
                         reagents, and DNA extraction kit reagents. Furthermore, pathogen
                         contamination has been identified in sequencing reagents. All PCR
                         amplicons should therefore be run on an agarose gel prior to
                         sequencing. The presence of contaminating DNA represents a
                         particular challenge for researchers working with samples contain-
                         ing a low microbial biomass such as those from the blood or lungs.
                         Contamination not only affects 16S rRNA gene sequencing but
                         also affects whole genome sequencing (shotgun metagenomics),
                         and it seems to be mainly caused by soil- or water-dwelling bacteria.
                         Some recommendations to decrease the impact of contaminants are
                         (1) maximizing the starting sample biomass as microbial loads
                         lower than 103 to 104 may not provide robust results; (2) minimiz-
                         ing risk of contamination at the time of sample collection;
                         (3) recording the batches of kits used for each particular sample;
                         (4) processing samples at random order and in replicates or tripli-
                         cates; and (5) checking for taxa that are biologically unexpected for
                         the sample of hand [67].
                  Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research       311

                           DNA extraction is considered as a bottleneck of an otherwise
                       high-throughput microbiota NGS as it is manual and time-
                       consuming. Several semiautomated fecal DNA extraction protocols
                       have been recently created promising to expedite the process,
                       reduce variability, and eliminate potential human errors. More
                       research, however, is needed to evaluate their validity and reliability
                       in comparison to already existent manual protocols [68].

1.6 PCR                Correct selection of 16S rRNA variable region gene primers is
Amplification          critical for downstream analysis and identification of key taxa that
                       are biologically important for each particular study population.
                       Further information regarding primer selection is provided in the
                       following section.
                            PCR amplification is an important stopping point to assess
                       purity of samples. The presence of 16S rRNA amplicons in the
                       negative controls suggests reagent or user contamination of the
                       sample extraction procedure and should be used to optimize
                       extraction procedures (for details see Salter et al. 2014).
                            After confirming amplification of the 16S rRNA gene in sam-
                       ples and absence of amplification in background and/or H2O
                       control samples, then variable region PCR amplification can pro-
                       ceed. The following 16S rRNA PCR protocol from the Langille
                       Lab is recommended prior to sequencing [69] and contains step-
                       by-step wet lab and bioinformatic protocols for 16S rRNA gene
                       and metagenomic sequencing.

1.7 Next-Generation    The two main approaches for inferring microbial community com-
Sequencing             position are 16S rRNA and whole genome shotgun sequencing.
                       Choosing between each of these methods will largely depend on
                       the experimental setting and cost; therefore, it is important to
                       highlight the advantages and disadvantages of each method.
                       Despite being cheaper and less time-consuming, performing 16S
                       rRNA gene sequencing has several other advantages over shotgun
                       metagenomics. For example, 16S rRNA gene sequencing is able to
                       identify a higher number of bacteria in comparison to whole
                       genome sequencing. This is because, to this day, genomic databases
                       contain about an order of magnitude less sequences stored than
                       16S rRNA databases (as amplicon analyses were the first molecular
                       tool to be applied to the human microbiota) [70, 71]. Analysis of
                       the 16S rRNA gene gives a qualitative and semiquantitative descrip-
                       tion of the bacteria present in a complex biological system by
                       amplifying only a section of the DNA used to identify target
                       genes [71]. One critical drawback to using this method for quanti-
                       fication is the presence of multiple 16S rRNA copies in multiple
                       species. Thus, while it might appear as one taxon that is relatively
                       higher in abundance, it also may be an artifact of that taxa carrying
                       multiple 16S rRNA gene copies [72–74]. This issue can be over-
                       come in later analysis by conducting absolute quantitative PCR
312   Elisa Morales et al.

                         (e.g., droplet digital PCR) for the specific species identified. 16S
                         rRNA gene analysis clusters similar sequences at a particular level of
                         identity and counts the number of representatives of each cluster.
                         These clusters of similar sequences are referred to as operational
                         taxonomic units (OTU), which are generated by binning organisms
                         together that possess either 97% or 100% of similarity for identifi-
                         cation at the genus level. Currently, it is not recommended to
                         generate species-level assignments using individual variable regions
                         of the 16S rRNA gene. Newer methods now exist, however, to infer
                         species-level identification based on sequence variance analysis
                         (SVA), which is described by Mallick et al. (2017) [10].
                              Another key consideration prior to amplification of the 16S
                         rRNA gene is the choice of variable region. Prokaryotic 16S rRNA
                         is a 1.5 kb long gene that contains conserved and variable regions
                         [45]. There are nine “hypervariable regions” labeled V1 to V9.
                         Hypervariable regions are flanked by highly conserved DNA
                         sequences that are similar among most bacteria. These conserved
                         regions serve as anchors for universal PCR primers. On the con-
                         trary, hypervariable regions have different gene sequence among
                         bacterial taxa allowing their identification. The nucleotide spans of
                         the nine hypervariable regions are 69–99 (V1), 137–242 (V2),
                         433–497 (V3), 576–682 (V4), 822–879 (V5), 986–1043 (V6),
                         1117–1173 (V7), 1243–1294 (V8), and 1435–1465 (V9).
                              Unfortunately, no single hypervariable region is capable of
                         differentiating among all bacteria; thus, careful selection of target
                         sequences is highly dependent on the microbes of interest. In
                         bacterial cultures, V1 (30 bp in length), for example, has shown
                         to best differentiate among Staphylococcus sp., as well as Streptococ-
                         cus sp. Whereas, V2 and V3 were able to distinguish all bacterial
                         species to the genus level except for those closely related to Enter-
                         obacteriaceae. Additionally, V2 (106 bp in length) distinguished
                         better among Mycobacterium, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and
                         Clostridium sp., while V3 (65 bp in length) proved better resolu-
                         tion among Haemophilus sp., Enterobacteriaceae, K. pneumoniae,
                         and E. aerogenes. V6 (58 bp in length) was also able to distinguish
                         among most bacterial species except those of Enterobacteriaceae
                         and proved to be the best to distinguish B. anthracis and
                         B. cereus. On the other hand, V7, V8, and especially V5 were less
                         useful targets for genus- or species-specific probes due to their
                         higher degree of sequence conservation in comparison with the
                         rest of the hypervariable regions. Combining the hypervariable
                         regions V2, V3, and V6 increases the resolution to the genus level
                         for all the 110 bacterial species and down to the species level for
                         most of them (but not all). While these three hypervariable regions
                         have the highest nucleotide heterogeneity and discriminatory
                         power from the nine, V4 has been used extensively in the majority
                         of fecal-based studies and thus has the strongest ability to compare
                         across studies [75]. Once 16S rRNA gene segments have been
Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research      313

     amplified, their sequences are aligned with existing reference
     genome databases (NRC 2007). This technique allows the most
     taxonomic information in the smallest span of nucleotides at a more
     affordable price [75].
          The use of melting curves to evaluate for primer dimers or
     unwanted amplifications is also recommended [66]. After sequenc-
     ing is complete, the use of software such as FastQC (Babraham
     Bioinformatics) can be useful to quickly perform basic quality
     control checks on raw sequences of data coming from high-
     throughput sequencing pipelines.
          Several common bioinformatics processing tools are available
     for taking 16S rRNA reads from sequencing run output to taxo-
     nomic identification. The two most commonly applied tools are
     MOTHUR (https://www.mothur.org) and QIIME (https://www.
     qiime.org), which are publically available, regularly updated, and
     well cited. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to enumerate the
     procedures in these complementary methods. Extremely detailed
     tutorials are available for each tool at their websites.
          Shotgun metagenomic sequencing represents a more precise
     and informative alternative to 16S rRNA that bypasses gene-specific
     amplification, thus sequencing all DNA located in the sample
     including that from viruses, fungi, and archaea [70]. It also pro-
     vides a more accurate representation of the bacterial composition
     and functionality in comparison to 16S rRNA. Techniques utilizing
     PCR amplification, such as 16S rRNA, can be easily contaminated
     and require many controls at all levels of the process [71], while
     metagenomic shotgun sequencing provides more information with
     reduced biases [76]. Unlike 16S rRNA, shotgun metagenomic
     sequencing provides higher resolution that allows the identification
     of specific species and strains of bacteria as well as mutations that
     allow the identification of sources of outbreaks and antibiotic resis-
     tance [11, 45, 70]. Several methods for 16S rRNA sequencing and
     shotgun metagenomics or metatranscriptomic sequencing are
     available, which have been most recently reviewed [10]. One final
     important consideration when designing large sample studies that
     require multiple sequencing runs, 16S rRNA or whole genome
     sequencing, is to consider the impact of batch effect. Therefore,
     careful setup of each plate including randomly distributed sample
     types (e.g., cases and controls), as well as duplicates and negative
     and positive controls (identical), will allow for batch effect adjust-
     ment across multiple plates or sequencing runs.
          This chapter, while not exhaustive in covering all methods
     necessary for human microbiome research, provides the necessary
     background and methodological details in order to initiate inde-
     pendent research in microbial ecology for the purpose of determin-
     ing associations with cancer biology. Future research methodology
     will likely advance most with regard to sequencing and will hope-
     fully converge on standardized methods for collection, extraction,
314      Elisa Morales et al.

                            sequencing, and bioinformatic/statistical analysis. In summary, this
                            information goes toward ensuring that high standards for micro-
                            biome research are maintained in order to produce quality repro-
                            ducible data for comparison across studies in future investigations
                            for cancer research.


2     Materials

2.1 Stool Sample                1. Spatula, stick, or spoon.
Collection                      2. Stool collection tube.
                                3. Stool collection hat.
                                4. Pair of gloves.
                                5. Biohazard bag.
                                6. Easy-fold mailbox.
                                7. Plastic clinical mailing bag.

2.2   DNA Extraction        For fecal samples:
2.2.1 Homogenization            1. 2 mL screw top.
with Lysis Buffer               2. Sterile zirconia beads.
                                3. ASL lysis buffer.
                                4. Vortex.
                            For sputum and other liquid samples:
                                1. 200 mM of monobasic sodium phosphate.
                                2. GES buffer (guanidine thiocyanate, EDTA disodium, pH 8.0,
                                   N-lauroylsarcosine sodium salt).
                                3. 2 mL screw top tube containing 0.2 g of 0.1 mm glass beads.
                                4. Homogenizer.
                            For skin samples:
                                1. Lysozyme solution.
                                2. Heat block.
                                3. Swabs.
                                4. Spin baskets and microtubes for preprocessing samples on
                                   swabs.
                            For tissue samples:
                                1. Lysozyme solution.
                                2. Heat block.
                                3. Proteinase K.
                        Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research   315

                             Enzymatic/mechanical lysis:
                                For fecal samples:
                              1. Incubator.
                              2. Homogenizer.
                              3. Centrifuge.
                              4. 2 mL tubes.
                              5. ASL lysis buffer.
                             For sputum and other liquid samples:
                              1. Lysozyme (100 mg/mL).
                              2. RNAse A (10 mg/mL of H2O).
                              3. Vortex.
                              4. Incubator.
                              5. 25% SDS.
                              6. Proteinase K.
                              7. 62.5 μL of 5 M NaCl.
                             For skin samples:
                              1. Stainless steel beads, size 5.0 mm.
                              2. Homogenizer.
                              3. Shaking heat block.
                              4. Ice.
                             For tissue samples:
                              1. Tubes containing 2.0–2.8 mm ceramic beads.
                              2. Homogenizer.

2.2.2 DNA Extraction/        For fecal samples:
Precipitation
                              1. 10 M ammonium acetate.
                              2. Incubator.
                              3. Centrifuge.
                              4. 1.5 mL tubes.
                              5. Isopropanol.
                              6. Ice.
                              7. 70% EtOH.
                             For sputum and other liquid samples:
                              1. Screw cap tubes.
                              2. 25:24:1 phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol.
                              3. 2 mL tubes.
316      Elisa Morales et al.

                                4. Vortex.
                                5. Centrifuge.
                            For skin samples:
                                1. Protein precipitation reagent.
                                2. Vortex.
                                3. Centrifuge.
                                4. 2 mL tubes.
                                5. 100% EtOH.
                            For tissue samples:
                                1. 1.5 μL tube.
                                2. RNAse A (5 μg/μL).
                                3. Heat block with shaking.
                                4. Ice.
                                5. Centrifuge.
                                6. Protein precipitation reagent.
                                7. Vortex.
                                8. 2 mL tubes.
                                9. 100% EtOH.

2.2.3 DNA Purification      For fecal samples:
                                1. Tris-EDTA.
                                2. DNase-free RNase (10 mg/mL).
                                3. Incubator.
                                4. Proteinase K.
                                5. AL buffer.
                                6. Vortex.
                                7. Ethanol (96–100%).
                                8. Spin column.
                                9. Wash buffer.
                            10. Centrifuge.
                            For sputum and other liquid samples:
                                1. DNA binding buffer.
                                2. 1.5 mL tubes.
                                3. Vortex.
                                4. DNA column.
                                5. Centrifuge.
                       Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research   317

                             6. Wash buffer.
                             7. Sterile DNase/RNase-free dH2O.
                            For skin samples:
                             1. gDNA column.
                             2. Centrifuge.
                             3. Wash buffer.
                             4. Safe-Lock PCR tubes.
                             5. PCR water.
                            For tissue samples:
                             1. gDNA column.
                             2. Centrifuge.
                             3. Wash buffer.
                             4. Safe-Lock PCR tubes.
                             5. PCR water.

2.2.4 DNA Quantification     1. 1% agarose gel or automated electrophoresis.
                             2. Fluorometer.

2.3 PCR                      1. 75% ETOH.
Amplification                2. 10% bleach.
                             3. Pre-PCR-labeled pipettes.
                             4. Filter tips.
                             5. Primers: 8F (50 -AGA GTT TGA TCC TGG CTC AG-30 ) and
                                1391R (50 -GAC GGG CGG TGW GTR CA-30 ).
                             6. PCR water.
                             7. 1.5 mL tubes.
                             8. Takara HS LA Taq (Taq DNA polymerase and DNA proof-
                                reading polymerase optimized for long-range PCR).
                             9. 10 buffer.
                            10. dNTP mix.
                            11. HS LA Taq (Taq polymerase plus a monoclonal antibody spe-
                                cific to Taq polymerase).
                            12. DMSO *optional for tissue.
                            13. Thermocycler.
                            14. 1% gel.
318      Elisa Morales et al.


3     Methods

3.1 Steps for Stool             1. Urinate first.
Collection (see Note 1)         2. Put gloves on.
                                3. Place the stool collection hat into the back of the toilet.
                                4. Have a bowel movement into the collection device.
                                5. Use the spatula, the stick, or the spoon to collect sample.
                                6. If using collection tubes, immediately screw back the cap with-
                                   out spilling the liquids.
                                        Some tubes recommend shaking the sample for a minimum
                                   of 30 s (or until all large particles have been dissolved).
                                        Discard the rest of the stool into the toilet, and place the
                                   collection hat and spatula in the garbage.
                                7. Follow instructions for storage of the tubes/cards. Commer-
                                   cial stool sample collection tubes are to be kept at environmen-
                                   tal temperature (15–25  C), while cards can be either
                                   maintained temporarily at environmental temperature or
                                   immediately frozen at 20 or 80  C.
                                8. Place the sample inside a sealed bag, and put the bag inside an
                                   easy-fold mailer (optional).
                                9. Place easy-fold mailer inside a plastic clinical shipping bag.
                            10. Ship in accordance to biological specimen regulations.
                               *Stool collection protocol was adapted from the Human
                            Microbiome Project,
                               Stool Collection and Shipping Instructions, and the OMNI-
                            gene User instructions.

3.2 Steps for DNA               1. Select a number of samples that is manageable (~12–24).
Extraction from                 2. Remove samples from 80  C and thaw them on ice.
Different Sources (see
                                3. Homogenization with lysis buffer (this will be different for
Notes 2–4)
                                   each sample type).
                            For fecal samples:
                                1. Add 100–200 mg of feces to a 2 mL screw top tube containing
                                   0.3 g of sterile zirconia beads.
                                2. Add 1.0 mL lysis buffer.
                                3. Vortex for 2 min.

3.2.1 For Sputum                1. Add 300 μL of sample, 800 μL of 200 mM of monobasic
and Other Liquid Samples           sodium phosphate, and 100 μL of GES buffer into a 2 mL
                                   screw top tube containing 0.2 g of 0.1 mm glass beads.
                                2. Bead beat with homogenizer for 3 min at 3000 rpm.
Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research     319

     For skin samples:
      1. Add lysozyme solution.
      2. Incubate in shaking heat block at 37  C for 1 h.
      3. Swabs are placed in UV-treated basket and placed back in tube
         for a short spin to collect excess buffer. Swabs are discarded
         in MPW.
     For tissue samples:
      1. Add lysozyme solution.
      2. Incubate in shaking heat block at 37  C for 1 h.
      3. Add 40 μL of proteinase K to each tube.
         Enzymatic/mechanical lysis:
     For fecal samples:
      1. Incubate for 15 min at 95  C.
      2. Cells are mechanically lysed by running the homogenizer
         instrument 1 min, resting 5 min for eight times.
      3. Samples are allowed to cool down on ice for 2 min.
      4. Tubes are then centrifuged at 16,000  g and 4  C for 5 min.
      5. Supernatant is transferred to a new 2 mL tube.
      6. The pellet is mixed with 300 μL of ASL lysis buffer, and steps
         2–5 are repeated.
      7. Supernatants are pooled in new 2 mL tubes.
     For sputum and other liquid samples:
      1. Add 50 μL of lysozyme and 10 μL of RNAse A.
      2. Mix with vortex.
      3. Incubate samples in a 37  C water bath for 1–1.5 h.
      4. Add 25 μL of 25% SDS, 25 μL of proteinase K, and 62.5 μL of
         5 M NaCl.
      5. Mix with vortex.
      6. Incubate samples in a 65  C water bath for 0.5–1.5 h.
     For skin samples:
      1. Add two sterile stainless steel beads to sample with bead
         dispenser.
      2. Bead beat using homogenizer for 2 min at 3500 rpm.
      3. Incubate tubes for 30 min at 65  C in shaking heat block.
      4. Ice for 5 min.
320      Elisa Morales et al.

                            For tissue samples:
                                1. Transfer contents into tube containing 2.0–2.8 mm ceramic
                                   beads.
                                2. Bead beat using homogenizer for 2 min at 3500 rpm.

3.2.2 DNA Extraction/       For fecal samples:
Precipitation
                                1. Add 260 μL of 10 M ammonium acetate to each lysate tube.
                                2. Mix well.
                                3. Incubate on ice for 5 min.
                                4. Centrifuge tubes at 16,000  g and 4  C for 10 min.
                                5. Transfer the supernatant to two 1.5 mL tubes; add one volume
                                   of isopropanol (measure the supernatant transferred into each
                                   tube to add the same volume of isopropanol).
                                6. Mix well.
                                7. Incubate on ice for 30 min.
                                8. Centrifuge tubes at 16,000  g and 4  C for 15 min.
                                9. Remove supernatant using careful aspiration without touching
                                   the solid pellet.
                            10. Wash nucleic acid pellet with 70% EtOH (0.5 mL), and dry the
                                pellet under vacuum for 3 min.
                            For sputum and other liquid samples:
                                1. Centrifuge screw cap tubes at 13,500  g for 5 min.
                                2. Add 900 μL of phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol to another
                                   set of 2 mL tubes.
                                3. Take 900 μL of supernatant from the screw cap tubes, and add
                                   it into the 2 mL tubes, thus creating a 1:1 volume solution of
                                   sample and phenol-chloroform.
                                4. Mix with vortex.
                                5. Centrifuge at <13,000  g for 10 min.
                            For skin samples:
                                1. Add 250 μL of protein precipitation solution.
                                2. Vortex tube 10s.
                                3. Spin max 10 min.
                                4. Transfer to new 2 mL tubes and add equal volume
                                   100% EtOH.
                            For tissue samples:
                                1. Remove liquid from tubes and add to new 1.5 μL tube.
                                2. Add 1 μL of RNAse A to each tube.
                         Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research   321

                               3. Incubate 30 min at 65  C in heat block with shaking.
                               4. Ice 5 min.
                               5. Max spin tubes (18,078  g) for 5 min and transfer supernatant
                                  to new tube.
                               6. Add 250 μL of protein precipitation solution.
                               7. Vortex tube10s.
                               8. Spin max 10 min.
                               9. Transfer to new 2 mL tubes and add equal volume COLD
                                  100% EtOH (~600 μL).

3.2.3 DNA Purification        For fecal samples:
                               1. Dissolve the nucleic acid pellet in 100 μL of Tris-EDTA.
                               2. Add 2 μL of DNase-free RNase.
                               3. Incubate at 37  C for 15 min.
                               4. Add 15 μL of proteinase K and 200 μL of AL buffer to the
                                  supernatant.
                               5. Mix with vortex.
                               6. Incubate at 70  C for 10 min.
                               7. Add 200 μL of ethanol (96–100%) to the lysate.
                               8. Mix with vortex.
                               9. Transfer to a spin column and centrifuge at 16,000  g for
                                  1 min at room temperature.
                              10. Discard flow-through.
                              11. Add 500 μL wash buffer and centrifuge at 16,000  g for 1 min
                                  at room temperature.
                              12. Discard flow-through.
                              13. Add 500 μL wash buffer and centrifuge at 16,000  g for 1 min
                                  at room temperature.
                              14. Dry the column by centrifugation at room temperature for
                                  1 min.
                              15. Add 200 μL buffer Tris-EDTA; incubate for 1 min at room
                                  temperature.
                              16. Centrifuge for 1 min at 16,000  g to elute DNA.
                              For sputum and other liquid samples:
                               1. Add 200 μL of DNA binding buffer to 1.75 mL tubes.
                               2. Carefully transfer the top layer (avoiding taking up any of the
                                  interface) of the centrifuged sample to the DNA binding buffer
                                  in the 1.5 mL tubes.
                               3. Mix with vortex.
322   Elisa Morales et al.

                             4. Transfer this solution to a DNA column 600 μL at a time.
                             5. Spin columns at <12,000  g.
                             6. Discard flow-through.
                             7. Once sample has moved through the column, add 200 μL of
                                wash buffer to the column.
                             8. Spin columns at <12,000  g.
                             9. Discard flow-through.
                         10. Repeat wash step once more (steps 7–9).
                         11. Place the columns into a new, sterile 1.5 mL tubes.
                         12. Add 50 μL of sterile DNase/RNase-free ddH2O preheated at
                             65  C to the center of each column.
                         13. Incubate the columns at room temperature for 5 min.
                         14. Elute the DNA into the 1.75 mL tubes by centrifuging the
                             columns in the tubes at a maximum speed of 12,000  g for
                             1 min.
                         For skin samples:
                             1. Apply sample to gDNA column.
                             2. Spin at maximum speed for 1 min.
                             3. Remove flow-through, and apply additional sample; spin until
                                all sample is used.
                             4. Place column in fresh collection tube.
                             5. Wash column with 500 μL Buffer 1.
                             6. Spin at maximum speed for 1 min.
                             7. Discard flow-through       and   place   column    in   fresh
                                collection tube.
                             8. Wash column with 500 μL Buffer 2.
                             9. Spin and discard flow-through spin at maximum speed for
                                3 min to dry.
                         10. Discard flow-through and place column in clean Safe-Lock
                             PCR tubes.
                         11. Apply 35 μL of PCR water to column.
                         12. Let sit ~3 min.
                         13. Spin at maximum speed for 30 s to elute DNA.
                         For tissue samples:
                             1. Apply sample to gDNA column.
                             2. Spin at maximum speed for 1 min.
                             3. Remove flow-through, and apply additional sample; spin until
                                all sample is used.
                         Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research    323

                               4. Place column in fresh collection tube.
                               5. Wash column with 500 μL Buffer 1.
                               6. Spin at maximum speed for 1 min.
                               7. Discard flow-through        and    place   column     in   fresh
                                  collection tube.
                               8. Wash column with 500 μL Buffer 2.
                               9. Spin and discard flow-through.
                              10. Spin at maximum speed for 3 min to dry.
                              11. Discard flow-through and place column in clean Safe-Lock
                                  PCR tubes.
                              12. Apply 35 μL of PCR water to column.
                              13. Let sit ~3 min.
                              14. Spin at maximum speed for 30 s to elute DNA.

3.2.4 DNA                      1. For quality control use 1% agarose gel or automated
Quantification (see Note 5)       electrophoresis.
                               2. For sample concentration use a fluorometer.
                               3. Store DNA at 20  C for short term <1 month (>1 month
                                  store at 80).
                                  Fecal, liquid, and skin/tissue DNA extraction protocols were
                              adapted from.
                                  Costea et al. (2017), Surette et al. (2014), Segre laboratory at
                              the National.
                                  Institutes of Health, and our laboratory at Baylor University
                              [35, 77, 78].

3.3 Steps for 16S              1. Clean bench space with 75% ETOH and 10% bleach.
rRNA gene PCR                  2. Use pre-PCR-labeled pipettes and filter tips.
Amplification Testing
                               3. Fecal sample ¼ 16S rRNA 25 cycles.
                               4. Background and H2O controls are generally 28 cycles.
                               5. Use primers: 8F and 1391R. Stock solution is at 100 μM, and
                                  working solution is at 20 μM, all diluted in PCR water (indi-
                                  vidual 1 mL tubes).
                               6. For each 25 μL reaction: use Takara HS LA Taq (Taq DNA
                                  polymerase and DNA proofreading polymerase optimized for
                                  long-range PCR).
                                  (a) μL 10 buffer,
                                  (b) 4 μL dNTP mix
                                  (c) 0.5 μL each primer (20 μM, ordered from IDT)
                                  (d) 0.25 μL Takara HS LA Taq
                                  (e) 2 μL of DNA depending on the sampling method
324    Elisa Morales et al.

                                 (f) 1 μL DMSO
                                 (g) To volume with PCR water.
                              7. Thermocycling: initial denaturation at 95  C for 5 min, fol-
                                 lowed by 25–30 cycles of 30 s at 95  C for denaturation, 30 s
                                 annealing at 55  C, and 1.5 min elongation at 72  C, all
                                 followed by final extension of 10 min at 72  C.
                              8. Separate PCR products on a 1% gel.
                              9. Do not stack lanes. Only run one row of lanes at a time.
                          10. Run gel long enough for ample separation.
                              *Adapted from the laboratories of Julie Segre and Elizabeth
                          Grice.

3.4 Statistical           Characteristics of microbiome data. After bioinformatics processing,
Considerations for        microbiome sequencing data are usually summarized into an abun-
Performing                dance table, which records the counts of all detected features (taxa/
Metagenomic Studies       gene) in each sample. While we focus the discussion on taxa abun-
                          dance data, similar principles apply to functional abundance data.
                          There are several important characteristics for microbiome data,
                          which need to be taken into account in the statistical analysis
                          [79]. First, the microbiome data are count data, where the variance
                          depends on the mean, and thus are not appropriate to be analyzed
                          directly using traditional statistical tools based on normal assump-
                          tions. Second, the microbiome data are highly dimensional, and the
                          number of taxa usually exceeds the number of samples.
                          Microbiome-wide hypothesis testing, which involves hundreds or
                          even thousands of statistical tests, should be corrected for multiple
                          testing to control for false positives [80]. Third, the microbiome
                          data contain excessive zeros. Those zeros are due to either under-
                          sampling of rare taxa (sampling zeros) or physical absence of the
                          taxa (structural zeros) [81]. The sampling zeros strongly depend on
                          the sequencing depth, while the structural zeros do not. The dif-
                          ferent nature of zeros, as well as the dependence of sampling zeros
                          on sequencing depth, requires the application of appropriate statis-
                          tical treatment in both diversity- and taxa-level analysis, especially
                          when the sequencing depth is a confounding variable that corre-
                          lates with the phenotype of interest. Finally, the taxa are phylogen-
                          etically related. Closely related taxa usually share biological
                          functions and tend to react to the environmental perturbation
                          similarly. Thus, the phylogenetic tree is essential prior to knowl-
                          edge, which can be used to increase the efficiency and power of
                          statistical analysis [82, 83].
                               Before moving to more advanced analysis, exploratory data
                          analysis for each variable (heat maps, ordination, stacked bar
                          plots, etc.) should be performed to assess the sequencing quality,
                          detect outliers, and determine sources of variability. The EMPeror
                          [84] in QIIME is an excellent software to perform exploratory data
Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research       325

     analysis. Potential confounders can also be identified at this stage,
     and they should be adjusted properly in both diversity and taxa-
     level analysis. Critically, for large studies it is often necessary to
     conduct multiple sequencing runs. Thus, as mentioned earlier,
     keeping track of the run or batch number is paramount when
     conducting exploratory analysis. It has been our experience that
     batch effects can significantly affect total number of reads per
     sample, which need to be controlled or adjusted for in later statisti-
     cal analyses. As part of this exploratory analysis, it is absolutely
     critical to conduct contamination checking, even if you did not
     see any 16S rRNA amplicons during the PCR testing as sequencing
     reagents may introduce contaminants. At this point comparing
     positive and negative controls should be conducted to assess poten-
     tial contaminants, especially so in low-biomass samples (e.g.,
     lungs). This can be assessed by (1) checking for consistency across
     runs in distribution of positive controls or taxa of interest and (2),
     after major analyses or association testing is complete, identifying
     taxa of interest that may have a signal that appears artefactual (for a
     detailed explanation, see [67, 85]).
          Diversity analysis. Diversity analysis, which summarizes the
     complex microbiome data into diversity measures, provides a holis-
     tic view of the microbiome. Both α-diversity and β-diversity ana-
     lyses have been routinely performed for microbiome data.
     α-Diversity (within-sample diversity) reflects species richness and
     evenness within the microbial community, while β-diversity
     (between-sample diversity) reflects the shared diversity between
     microbial communities. A plethora of diversity measures have
     been proposed, including phylogenetic vs. non-phylogenetic mea-
     sures and unweighted vs. weighted measures [86]. Phylogenetic
     measures take into account the phylogenetic relationship, while
     non-phylogenetic measures ignore such relationship. Phylogenetic
     measures are thus more powerful to reveal “clustered” phyloge-
     netic signals. Non-phylogenetic measures, on the other hand, are
     more efficient to detect “scattered” signals. Unweighted measures
     are defined based on the presence and absence data, while weighted
     measures are based on the abundance data. Since the majority of
     species are rare or less abundant, unweighted measures implicitly
     give most weights to those rare and less abundant species [87]. In
     contrast, weighted measures give more weights to abundant spe-
     cies. Many variants of weighted measures have been proposed,
     mainly differing in their weighting schemes. Depending on the
     specific condition, each measure could be the most powerful to
     reveal the difference. Without much prior knowledge, it may be
     helpful to inspect the representative measure in each category to
     avoid missing important signals. For α-diversity, representative
     non-phylogenetic measures include species richness (e.g., chao1),
     Shannon index, and Simpson index with increasing weights on
     abundant species [88], and phylogenetic measures include the
326   Elisa Morales et al.

                         unweighted phylogenetic diversity (PD) and abundance-weighted
                         PD [89]. For β-diversity, representative non-phylogenetic measures
                         include the Jaccard (unweighted) and Bray-Curtis (weighted) dis-
                         tance, and phylogenetic measures include the unweighted,
                         generalized, and weighted UniFrac distance with increasing
                         weights on abundant lineages [87].
                              For diversity analysis, the current practice still recommends
                         rarefaction-based normalization, which subsamples the counts of
                         different samples to even sequencing depth [90]. Although rare-
                         faction discards a significant proportion of reads and is not optimal
                         from an information perspective, it effectively reduces the variabil-
                         ity due to differential sequencing depths. It is especially crucial for
                         unweighted measures since the diversity of a sample strongly
                         depends on the sequencing depth and rarefaction makes the diver-
                         sity comparable across samples. Without rarefaction, samples tend
                         to cluster by sequencing depths, and the biological difference may
                         be masked. For confounded scenarios, where the variable of interest
                         such as case and control status is correlated with the sequencing
                         depth, rarefaction can efficiently reduce the confounding effects. In
                         contrast, scaling-based normalization, where the counts are divided
                         by a normalizing factor that reflects the sequencing depth, could
                         not address the problem since presence/absence status does not
                         change after normalization. For weighted measures, especially
                         those that place most weights on abundant species such as Simpson
                         index and weighted UniFrac, they are less sensitive to variable
                         sequencing depths [90]. Nevertheless, rarefaction does not affect
                         statistical power substantially for weighted measures unless the
                         rarefaction depth is too low (e.g., <1000).
                              To test the association between α- or β-diversity and the phe-
                         notype of interest (POI), a regression approach is preferred due to
                         its ability to adjust for covariates. Since α-diversity measures are
                         usually approximately normally distributed, a multiple linear
                         regression can be used to test the association between α-diversity
                         and POI. PERMANOVA (permutational multivariate analysis of
                         variance based on a distance matrix) can be used to test the associa-
                         tion between β-diversity and POI [91]. However, PERMANOVA
                         results may have inflated type I error in the presence of differential
                         dispersion and sample size imbalance for two-group comparison. In
                         such case, a multivariate Welch t-test on distances could be used
                         [92]. To combine different β-diversity measures to improve statis-
                         tical power, an omnibus test that takes multiple β-diversity mea-
                         sures can be performed [87, 93]. A closely related method,
                         MiRKAT (microbiome regression-based kernel association test),
                         which treats the β-diversity as a covariate, can also be used to test
                         the association between β-diversity and POI [94].
                              Differential abundance analysis. α- and β-diversity analysis
                         focuses on the community-level change and is instrumental in
                         establishing the overall microbiome-phenotype association
Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research      327

     through the aforementioned association tests. The next step is to
     perform differential abundance analysis (DAA), which aims to
     identify specific taxa associated with POI while controlling for
     potential confounders. Although multivariate methods, which
     jointly model the taxa and the phenotype, are emerging, univariate
     methods (one taxon at a time) are still the dominant approach for
     DAA. Over the past a few years, many DAA methods have been
     proposed including MetaStats [95], DESeq2 [96], edgeR [97],
     LEfSe [98], metagenomeSeq [99], ALDEx2 [100], RAIDA
     [101], ANCOM [102], and MicrobiomeDDA [103]. These meth-
     ods differ in the way to address the three statistical challenges of
     microbiome data, namely, variable sequencing depth, excessive
     zeros, and compositionality. Microbiome data are inherently com-
     positional—the counts only convey the relative abundance infor-
     mation [102, 104]. An increase in the abundance of one prevalent
     taxon will necessarily lead to the decrease in the relative abundances
     of the other taxa, which makes identifying truly differential taxa
     challenging. Although many evaluation studies have been done
     [90, 105, 106], no consensus has been reached about the optimal
     DAA method for microbiome sequencing data. Nevertheless, there
     are some recommendations for performing robust and powerful
     DAA:
      1. Test the correlation between the sequencing depth and POI
         first. If they are significantly correlated, sequencing depth
         could confound the association between the abundance and
         POI for those less abundant taxa especially when nonparamet-
         ric methods such as Wilcoxon rank sum test and Fisher’s exact
         test are used [90]. In such case, rarefaction may be performed
         for nonparametric tests, or consider using count-based regres-
         sion model (see step 2).
      2. Use regression methods based on over-dispersed and/or zero-
         inflated count data such as DESeq2 and MicrobiomeDDA.
         These methods directly model the counts without the need
         for rarefaction, so they are usually statistically more powerful.
         The compositional effect can be addressed through a proper
         normalization such as CSS [99] and GMPR [103]. Confounder
         adjustment and testing interaction are very natural in the
         regression framework. The regression coefficients are biologi-
         cally interpretable, and effect size can be readily defined. They
         are also amenable to meta-analysis, which combines effect sizes
         across studies [107]. However, there are some caveats for
         applying these count-based methods. Firstly, since they are
         based on parametric assumptions, they are vulnerable to out-
         liers. Outlier replacement strategy such as winsorization should
         be considered to reduce the impact of outliers [103]. Secondly,
         these count-based models require a normalizing factor to
         address variable sequencing depth. Their native normalization
328      Elisa Morales et al.

                                   procedures may not be optimal for zero-inflated count data.
                                   Consider replacing their native normalization with CSS [99]
                                   and GMPR [103] normalization; both are developed for
                                   microbiome data. Finally, the P-values from these methods
                                   are usually based on a large sample theory and may not be
                                   accurate for small sample sizes or rare taxa with many zeros.
                                   Filtering out the less prevalent taxa before testing is recom-
                                   mended: generally, those that are represented by <5% abun-
                                   dance and/or are present in less than five samples in total
                                   (depending on sample size).
                                3. Test the method before using it. It is possible that the best
                                   method depends on the data characteristics [90]. It is thus
                                   advisable that the method is tested on the label-shuffled data
                                   to ensure proper false-positive control and on data with in silico
                                   spiked taxa to evaluate the statistical power [106]. Select meth-
                                   ods with adequate false-positive control and reasonable power.
                                For additional information regarding data reproducibility in
                            microbial ecology research, a series of tutorial videos have been
                            published by the laboratory of Patrick Schloss and can be accessed
                            using the following weblink: riffomonas.org.


4     Notes

                                1. If using the spatula (as the one provided by several commercial
                                   kits), fill out about 1/4 of the spatula with sample, and transfer
                                   the fecal sample into the yellow tube top until this one is full
                                   (without pushing the sample into the tube). If using the spoon
                                   provided, fill out one complete spoon. If sticks are used (as the
                                   ones provided by commercial cards), take a small amount of
                                   sample, and smear it into the indicated applicator. If stool
                                   samples are not well formed (e.g., diarrhea), then a spoon is
                                   recommended for collection.
                                2. Before starting DNA extraction, make sure to clean bench,
                                   pipettes, centrifuge, and racks with 75% EtOH and 10% bleach.
                                   Sterilize all pipettes, racks, forceps, and beads with UV light for
                                   30 min. Also, make sure to obtain a negative control sample
                                   (50–100 μL or similar to your sample volume) of clean water
                                   that will be used for each set of samples to be extracted. This
                                   will identify any background contaminants in your extraction
                                   and sequencing procedures. Lastly, make sure to keep separate
                                   tips and pipettes for pre-PCR and post-PCR. Labeling each
                                   clearly is recommended prior to beginning extraction. Best
                                   practices include further separating the areas (e.g., different
                                   rooms) for pre-PCR and post-PCR or using an enclosed
                      Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research            329

                                 cabinet/hood for DNA extraction to reduce introduction of
                                 contaminants.
                              3. Before performing enzymatic lysis, if specific species of interest
                                 are identified a priori, efforts should be made to choose the
                                 most effective enzyme for lysis.
                              4. When performing mechanical lysis, remember that different
                                 tissues require different types and size of beads. A set of samples
                                 should be tested first to identify the most prudent methods by
                                 quantifying total DNA and integrity using precision tools such
                                 as automated electrophoresis and fluorometers for accurate
                                 quantification.
                              5. DNA quality (A280/A260) needs to be >1.85 (A260/A230,
                                 2.0–2.2), with less than 25% of the sample <1.8 kb fragments.
                                 DNA quantity needs to be >500 ng/μL. For more detailed
                                 DNA quality analysis methods and procedures, see Olson and
                                 Morrow [63].

References

  1. NRC (2007) The new science of metage-                 Schneider JG, Hogan A, Beaufort C, Wilmes
     nomics—revealing the secrets of our micro-            P (2016) Erratum: Integrated multi-omics of
     bial planet. The National Academies Press,            the human gut microbiome in a case study of
     Washington, DC                                        familial type 1 diabetes. Nat Microbiol
  2. Schmidt TM (2006) The maturing of micro-              2:16227.           https://doi.org/10.1038/
     bial ecology. Int Microbiol 9(3):217–223              nmicrobiol.2016.227
  3. Brock TD (1987) The study of microorgan-          10. Mallick H, Ma S, Franzosa EA, Vatanen T,
     isms in situ: progress and problems. Symp Soc         Morgan XC, Huttenhower C (2017) Experi-
     Gen Microbiol 41:1–17                                 mental design and quantitative analysis of
  4. Amann RI, Ludwig W, Schleifer KH (1995)               microbial community multiomics. Genome
     Phylogenetic identification and in situ detec-        Biol 18(1):228. https://doi.org/10.1186/
     tion of individual microbial cells without cul-       s13059-017-1359-z
     tivation. Microbiol Rev 59(1):143–169             11. Snitkin ES, Zelazny AM, Thomas PJ, Stock F,
  5. Woese CR, Fox GE (1977) Phylogenetic                  Group NCSP, Henderson DK, Palmore TN,
     structure of the prokaryotic domain: the pri-         Segre JA (2012) Tracking a hospital outbreak
     mary kingdoms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 74            of carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumo-
     (11):5088–5090                                        niae with whole-genome sequencing. Sci
                                                           Transl Med 4(148):148ra116. https://doi.
  6. Pace NR, Stahl DA, Lane DJ, Olsen GJ                  org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3004129
     (1986) The Analysis of Natural Microbial
     Populations by Ribosomal RNA Sequences.           12. Shibata T (2015) Current and future molecu-
     In: Marshall K.C. (eds) Adv Microb Ecol               lar profiling of cancer by next-generation
     vol 9. Springer, Boston, MA                           sequencing. Jpn J Clin Oncol 45
                                                           (10):895–899.      https://doi.org/10.1093/
  7. Maron PA, Ranjard L, Mougel C, Lemanceau              jjco/hyv122
     P (2007) Metaproteomics: a new approach
     for studying functional microbial ecology.        13. Vogtmann E, Goedert JJ (2016) Epidemio-
     Microb Ecol 53(3):486–493. https://doi.               logic studies of the human microbiome and
     org/10.1007/s00248-006-9196-8                         cancer. Br J Cancer 114(3):237–242. https://
                                                           doi.org/10.1038/bjc.2015.465
  8. Behjati S, Tarpey PS (2013) What is next
     generation sequencing? Arch Dis Child Educ        14. Drewes JL, White JR, Dejea CM, Fathi P,
     Pract Ed 98(6):236–238. https://doi.org/              Iyadorai T, Vadivelu J, Roslani AC, Wick
     10.1136/archdischild-2013-304340                      EC, Mongodin EF, Loke MF, Thulasi K,
                                                           Gan HM, Goh KL, Chong HY, Kumar S,
  9. Heintz-Buschart A, May P, Laczny CC, Leb-             Wanyiri JW, Sears CL (2017) High-resolution
     run LA, Bellora C, Krishna A, Wampach L,
330     Elisa Morales et al.

    bacterial 16S rRNA gene profile meta-analysis         of Fusobacterium with colorectal carcinoma.
    and biofilm status reveal common colorectal           Genome Res 22(2):292–298. https://doi.
    cancer consortia. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes            org/10.1101/gr.126573.111
    3:34.      https://doi.org/10.1038/s41522-        22. McDermott AJ, Huffnagle GB (2014) The
    017-0040-3                                            microbiome and regulation of mucosal immu-
15. Bullman S, Pedamallu CS, Sicinska E, Clancy           nity. Immunology 142(1):24–31. https://
    TE, Zhang X, Cai D, Neuberg D, Huang K,               doi.org/10.1111/imm.12231
    Guevara F, Nelson T, Chipashvili O, Hagan T,      23. Gopalakrishnan V, Spencer CN, Nezi L,
    Walker M, Ramachandran A, Diosdado B,                 Reuben A, Andrews MC, Karpinets TV,
    Serna G, Mulet N, Landolfi S, Ramon YCS,              Prieto PA, Vicente D, Hoffman K, Wei SC,
    Fasani R, Aguirre AJ, Ng K, Elez E, Ogino S,          Cogdill AP, Zhao L, Hudgens CW, Hutchin-
    Tabernero J, Fuchs CS, Hahn WC,                       son DS, Manzo T, Petaccia de Macedo M,
    Nuciforo P, Meyerson M (2017) Analysis of             Cotechini T, Kumar T, Chen WS, Reddy
    Fusobacterium persistence and antibiotic              SM, Szczepaniak Sloane R, Galloway-Pena J,
    response in colorectal cancer. Science 358            Jiang H, Chen PL, Shpall EJ, Rezvani K,
    (6369):1443–1448.         https://doi.org/10.         Alousi AM, Chemaly RF, Shelburne S, Vence
    1126/science.aal5240                                  LM, Okhuysen PC, Jensen VB, Swennes AG,
16. Zackular JP, Baxter NT, Chen GY, Schloss PD           McAllister F, Marcelo Riquelme Sanchez E,
    (2016) Manipulation of the gut microbiota             Zhang Y, Le Chatelier E, Zitvogel L, Pons N,
    reveals role in colon tumorigenesis. mSphere          Austin-Breneman JL, Haydu LE, Burton EM,
    1(1):e00001-15. https://doi.org/10.1128/              Gardner JM, Sirmans E, Hu J, Lazar AJ,
    mSphere.00001-15                                      Tsujikawa T, Diab A, Tawbi H, Glitza IC,
17. Zackular JP, Baxter NT, Iverson KD, Sadler            Hwu WJ, Patel SP, Woodman SE, Amaria
    WD, Petrosino JF, Chen GY, Schloss PD                 RN, Davies MA, Gershenwald JE, Hwu P,
    (2013) The gut microbiome modulates                   Lee JE, Zhang J, Coussens LM, Cooper ZA,
    colon      tumorigenesis.      MBio       4(6):       Futreal PA, Daniel CR, Ajami NJ, Petrosino
    e00692–e00613. https://doi.org/10.1128/               JF, Tetzlaff MT, Sharma P, Allison JP, Jenq
    mBio.00692-13                                         RR, Wargo JA (2018) Gut microbiome mod-
18. Peters BA, Wu J, Pei Z, Yang L, Purdue MP,            ulates response to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy
    Freedman ND, Jacobs EJ, Gapstur SM, Hayes             in melanoma patients. Science 359
    RB, Ahn J (2017) Oral microbiome composi-             (6371):97–103. https://doi.org/10.1126/
    tion reflects prospective risk for esophageal         science.aan4236
    cancers. Cancer Res 77(23):6777–6787.             24. Dejea CM, Fathi P, Craig JM, Boleij A,
    https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-                Taddese R, Geis AL, Wu X, DeStefano Shields
    17-1296                                               CE, Hechenbleikner EM, Huso DL, Anders
19. Yoshimoto S, Loo TM, Atarashi K, Kanda H,             RA, Giardiello FM, Wick EC, Wang H, Wu S,
    Sato S, Oyadomari S, Iwakura Y, Oshima K,             Pardoll DM, Housseau F, Sears CL (2018)
    Morita H, Hattori M, Honda K, Ishikawa Y,             Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
    Hara E, Ohtani N (2013) Obesity-induced               harbor colonic biofilms containing tumori-
    gut microbial metabolite promotes liver can-          genic bacteria. Science 359(6375):592–597.
    cer through senescence secretome. Nature              https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aah3648
    499(7456):97–101.         https://doi.org/10.     25. Gagniere J, Bonnin V, Jarrousse AS,
    1038/nature12347                                      Cardamone E, Agus A, Uhrhammer N,
20. Kostic AD, Chun E, Robertson L, Glickman              Sauvanet P, Dechelotte P, Barnich N,
    JN, Gallini CA, Michaud M, Clancy TE,                 Bonnet R, Pezet D, Bonnet M (2017) Inter-
    Chung DC, Lochhead P, Hold GL, El-Omar                actions between microsatellite instability and
    EM, Brenner D, Fuchs CS, Meyerson M, Gar-             human gut colonization by Escherichia coli in
    rett WS (2013) Fusobacterium nucleatum                colorectal cancer. Clin Sci (Lond) 131
    potentiates intestinal tumorigenesis and mod-         (6):471–485.       https://doi.org/10.1042/
    ulates the tumor-immune microenvironment.             CS20160876
    Cell Host Microbe 14(2):207–215. https://         26. Wang X, Yang Y, Huycke MM (2015) Com-
    doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2013.07.007                    mensal bacteria drive endogenous transforma-
21. Kostic AD, Gevers D, Pedamallu CS,                    tion and tumour stem cell marker expression
    Michaud M, Duke F, Earl AM, Ojesina AI,               through a bystander effect. Gut 64
    Jung J, Bass AJ, Tabernero J, Baselga J, Liu C,       (3):459–468.       https://doi.org/10.1136/
    Shivdasani RA, Ogino S, Birren BW,                    gutjnl-2014-307213
    Huttenhower C, Garrett WS, Meyerson M             27. Purcell RV, Pearson J, Aitchison A, Dixon L,
    (2012) Genomic analysis identifies association        Frizelle FA, Keenan JI (2017) Colonization
                     Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research            331

    with enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis is     35. Costea PI, Zeller G, Sunagawa S, Pelletier E,
    associated with early-stage colorectal neopla-       Alberti A, Levenez F, Tramontano M,
    sia. PLoS One 12(2):e0171602. https://doi.           Driessen M, Hercog R, Jung FE, Kultima
    org/10.1371/journal.pone.0171602                     JR, Hayward MR, Coelho LP, Allen-Vercoe E,
28. Raisch J, Buc E, Bonnet M, Sauvanet P,               Bertrand L, Blaut M, Brown JRM, Carton T,
    Vazeille E, de Vallee A, Dechelotte P,               Cools-Portier S, Daigneault M, Derrien M,
    Darcha C, Pezet D, Bonnet R, Bringer MA,             Druesne A, de Vos WM, Finlay BB, Flint HJ,
    Darfeuille-Michaud A (2014) Colon cancer-            Guarner F, Hattori M, Heilig H, Luna RA,
    associated B2 Escherichia coli colonize gut          van Hylckama Vlieg J, Junick J, Klymiuk I,
    mucosa and promote cell proliferation.               Langella P, Le Chatelier E, Mai V,
    World J Gastroenterol 20(21):6560–6572.              Manichanh C, Martin JC, Mery C,
    https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v20.i21.6560             Morita H, O’Toole PW, Orvain C, Patil KR,
29. Castellarin M, Warren RL, Freeman JD,                Penders J, Persson S, Pons N, Popova M,
    Dreolini L, Krzywinski M, Strauss J,                 Salonen A, Saulnier D, Scott KP, Singh B,
    Barnes R, Watson P, Allen-Vercoe E, Moore            Slezak K, Veiga P, Versalovic J, Zhao L, Zoe-
    RA, Holt RA (2012) Fusobacterium nuclea-             tendal EG, Ehrlich SD, Dore J, Bork P (2017)
    tum infection is prevalent in human colorectal       Towards standards for human fecal sample
    carcinoma. Genome Res 22(2):299–306.                 processing in metagenomic studies. Nat Bio-
    https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.126516.111                technol 35(11):1069–1076. https://doi.
                                                         org/10.1038/nbt.3960
30. Strauss J, Kaplan GG, Beck PL, Rioux K,
    Panaccione R, Devinney R, Lynch T, Allen-        36. Clarke SF, Murphy EF, O’Sullivan O, Lucey
    Vercoe E (2011) Invasive potential of gut            AJ, Humphreys M, Hogan A, Hayes P,
    mucosa-derived Fusobacterium nucleatum               O’Reilly M, Jeffery IB, Wood-Martin R, Ker-
    positively correlates with IBD status of the         ins DM, Quigley E, Ross RP, O’Toole PW,
    host. Inflamm Bowel Dis 17(9):1971–1978.             Molloy MG, Falvey E, Shanahan F, Cotter PD
    https://doi.org/10.1002/ibd.21606                    (2014) Exercise and associated dietary
                                                         extremes impact on gut microbial diversity.
31. Baxter NT, Ruffin MT, Rogers MA, Schloss             Gut 63(12):1913–1920. https://doi.org/
    PD (2016) Microbiota-based model improves            10.1136/gutjnl-2013-306541
    the sensitivity of fecal immunochemical test
    for detecting colonic lesions. Genome Med 8      37. Biedermann L, Zeitz J, Mwinyi J, Sutter-
    (1):37. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-              Minder E, Rehman A, Ott SJ, Steurer-
    016-0290-3                                           Stey C, Frei A, Frei P, Scharl M, Loessner
                                                         MJ, Vavricka SR, Fried M, Schreiber S,
32. Iida N, Dzutsev A, Stewart CA, Smith L,              Schuppler M, Rogler G (2013) Smoking ces-
    Bouladoux N, Weingarten RA, Molina DA,               sation induces profound changes in the com-
    Salcedo R, Back T, Cramer S, Dai RM,                 position of the intestinal microbiota in
    Kiu H, Cardone M, Naik S, Patri AK,                  humans. PLoS One 8(3):e59260. https://
    Wang E, Marincola FM, Frank KM,                      doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0059260
    Belkaid Y, Trinchieri G, Goldszmid RS
    (2013) Commensal bacteria control cancer         38. David LA, Maurice CF, Carmody RN, Goo-
    response to therapy by modulating the                tenberg DB, Button JE, Wolfe BE, Ling AV,
    tumor microenvironment. Science 342                  Devlin AS, Varma Y, Fischbach MA, Biddin-
    (6161):967–970. https://doi.org/10.1126/             ger SB, Dutton RJ, Turnbaugh PJ (2014)
    science.1240527                                      Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the
                                                         human gut microbiome. Nature 505
33. Zitvogel L, Kroemer G (2012) Targeting               (7484):559–563. https://doi.org/10.1038/
    PD-1/PD-L1 interactions for cancer immu-             nature12820
    notherapy.         Oncoimmunology            1
    (8):1223–1225. https://doi.org/10.4161/          39. Flores R, Shi J, Fuhrman B, Xu X, Veenstra
    onci.21335                                           TD, Gail MH, Gajer P, Ravel J, Goedert JJ
                                                         (2012) Fecal microbial determinants of fecal
34. Sinha R, Abu-Ali G, Vogtmann E, Fodor AA,            and systemic estrogens and estrogen metabo-
    Ren B, Amir A, Schwager E, Crabtree J, Ma S          lites: a cross-sectional study. J Transl Med
    Microbiome Quality Control Project C,                10:253.      https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-
    Abnet CC, Knight R, White O, Huttenhower             5876-10-253
    C(2017) Assessment of variation in microbial
    community amplicon sequencing by the             40. Salazar N, Arboleya S, Valdes L, Stanton C,
    Microbiome Quality Control (MBQC) proj-              Ross P, Ruiz L, Gueimonde M, de Los Reyes-
    ect consortium. Nat Biotechnol 35                    Gavilan CG (2014) The human intestinal
    (11):1077–1086. https://doi.org/10.1038/             microbiome at extreme ages of life. Dietary
    nbt.3981                                             intervention as a way to counteract
332     Elisa Morales et al.

    alterations. Front Genet 5:406. https://doi.           McGovern DPB, Vlamakis H, Xavier RJ, Hut-
    org/10.3389/fgene.2014.00406                           tenhower C (2018) Dynamics of metatran-
41. Macfarlane S (2014) Antibiotic treatments              scription in the inflammatory bowel disease
    and microbes in the gut. Environ Microbiol             gut     microbiome.      Nat     Microbiol    3
    16(4):919–924. https://doi.org/10.1111/                (3):337–346.       https://doi.org/10.1038/
    1462-2920.12399                                        s41564-017-0089-z
42. Seto CT, Jeraldo P, Orenstein R, Chia N,           51. Sinha R, Chen J, Amir A, Vogtmann E, Shi J,
    DiBaise JK (2014) Prolonged use of a proton            Inman KS, Flores R, Sampson J, Knight R,
    pump inhibitor reduces microbial diversity:            Chia N (2016) Collecting fecal samples for
    implications for Clostridium difficile suscepti-       microbiome analyses in epidemiology studies.
    bility. Microbiome 2:42. https://doi.org/10.           Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 25
    1186/2049-2618-2-42                                    (2):407–416.       https://doi.org/10.1158/
43. Lee H, Ko G (2014) Effect of metformin on              1055-9965.EPI-15-0951
    metabolic improvement and gut microbiota.          52. Bassis CM, Moore NM, Lolans K, Seekatz
    Appl Environ Microbiol 80(19):5935–5943.               AM, Weinstein RA, Young VB, Hayden MK,
    https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01357-14                   Program CDCPE (2017) Comparison of
44. Hill CJ, Brown JR, Lynch DB, Jeffery IB,               stool versus rectal swab samples and storage
    Ryan CA, Ross RP, Stanton C, O’Toole PW                conditions on bacterial community profiles.
    (2016) Effect of room temperature transport            BMC Microbiol 17(1):78. https://doi.org/
    vials on DNA quality and phylogenetic com-             10.1186/s12866-017-0983-9
    position of faecal microbiota of elderly adults    53. Abrahamson M, Hooker E, Ajami NJ, Petro-
    and infants. Microbiome 4(1):19. https://              sino JF, Orwoll ES (2017) Successful collec-
    doi.org/10.1186/s40168-016-0164-3                      tion of stool samples for microbiome analyses
45. Thomas V, Clark J, Dore J (2015) Fecal                 from a large community-based population of
    microbiota analysis: an overview of sample             elderly men. Contemp Clin Trials Commun
    collection methods and sequencing strategies.          7:158–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.con
    Future Microbiol 10(9):1485–1504. https://             ctc.2017.07.002
    doi.org/10.2217/fmb.15.87                          54. Song SJ, Amir A, Metcalf JL, Amato KR, Xu
46. Sze MA, Schloss PD (2016) Looking for a                ZZ, Humphrey G, Knight R (2016) Preserva-
    signal in the noise: revisiting obesity and the        tion methods differ in fecal microbiome sta-
    microbiome. MBio 7(4):e01018–e01016.                   bility, affecting suitability for field studies.
    https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.01018-16                  mSystems 1(3):e00021-16. https://doi.org/
                                                           10.1128/mSystems.00021-16
47. Kelly BJ, Gross R, Bittinger K, Sherrill-Mix S,
    Lewis JD, Collman RG, Bushman FD, Li H             55. Choo JM, Leong LE, Rogers GB (2015)
    (2015) Power and sample-size estimation for            Sample storage conditions significantly influ-
    microbiome studies using pairwise distances            ence faecal microbiome profiles. Sci Rep
    and PERMANOVA. Bioinformatics 31                       5:16350.           https://doi.org/10.1038/
    (15):2461–2468. https://doi.org/10.1093/               srep16350
    bioinformatics/btv183                              56. Vogtmann E, Chen J, Kibriya MG, Chen Y,
48. La Rosa PS, Brooks JP, Deych E, Boone EL,              Islam T, Eunes M, Ahmed A, Naher J,
    Edwards DJ, Wang Q, Sodergren E,                       Rahman A, Amir A, Shi J, Abnet CC,
    Weinstock G, Shannon WD (2012) Hypothe-                Nelson H, Knight R, Chia N, Ahsan H,
    sis testing and power calculations for                 Sinha R (2017) Comparison of fecal collec-
    taxonomic-based human microbiome data.                 tion methods for microbiota studies in
    PLoS One 7(12):e52078. https://doi.org/                Bangladesh. Appl Environ Microbiol 83(10):
    10.1371/journal.pone.0052078                           e00361-17.         https://doi.org/10.1128/
                                                           AEM.00361-17
49. Mattiello F, Verbist B, Faust K, Raes J, Shan-
    non WD, Bijnens L, Thas O (2016) A web             57. Bahl MI, Bergstrom A, Licht TR (2012)
    application for sample size and power calcula-         Freezing fecal samples prior to DNA extrac-
    tion in case-control microbiome studies. Bio-          tion affects the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes
    informatics 32(13):2038–2040. https://doi.             ratio determined by downstream quantitative
    org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btw099                      PCR analysis. FEMS Microbiol Lett 329
                                                           (2):193–197.      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
50. Schirmer M, Franzosa EA, Lloyd-Price J,                1574-6968.2012.02523.x
    McIver LJ, Schwager R, Poon TW, Ananthak-
    rishnan AN, Andrews E, Barron G, Lake K,           58. Yuan S, Cohen DB, Ravel J, Abdo Z, Forney
    Prasad M, Sauk J, Stevens B, Wilson RG,                LJ (2012) Evaluation of methods for the
    Braun J, Denson LA, Kugathasan S,                      extraction and purification of DNA from the
                                                           human microbiome. PLoS One 7(3):e33865.
                      Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research              333

    https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.                  Methods 122:64–72. https://doi.org/10.
    0033865                                                1016/j.mimet.2016.01.013
59. Wesolowska-Andersen           A,  Bahl      MI,    67. Salter SJ, Cox MJ, Turek EM, Calus ST,
    Carvalho V, Kristiansen K, Sicheritz-Ponten T,         Cookson WO, Moffatt MF, Turner P,
    Gupta R, Licht TR (2014) Choice of bacterial           Parkhill J, Loman NJ, Walker AW (2014)
    DNA extraction method from fecal material              Reagent and laboratory contamination can
    influences community structure as evaluated            critically impact sequence-based microbiome
    by metagenomic analysis. Microbiome 2:19.              analyses. BMC Biol 12:87. https://doi.org/
    https://doi.org/10.1186/2049-2618-2-19                 10.1186/s12915-014-0087-z
60. Hsieh YH, Peterson CM, Raggio A, Keenan            68. Rintala A, Pietila S, Munukka E, Eerola E,
    MJ, Martin RJ, Ravussin E, Marco ML                    Pursiheimo JP, Laiho A, Pekkala S, Huovinen
    (2016) Impact of different fecal processing            P (2017) Gut microbiota analysis results are
    methods on assessments of bacterial diversity          highly dependent on the 16S rRNA gene tar-
    in the human intestine. Front Microbiol                get region, whereas the impact of DNA
    7:1643.       https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.           extraction is minor. J Biomol Tech 28
    2016.01643                                             (1):19–30.      https://doi.org/10.7171/jbt.
61. Kumar J, Kumar M, Gupta S, Ahmed V,                    17-2801-003
    Bhambi M, Pandey R, Chauhan NS (2016)              69. Comeau A, Douglas G, Langille M (2017)
    An improved methodology to overcome key                Microbiome Helper: a Custom and Stream-
    issues in human fecal metagenomic DNA                  lined Workflow for Microbiome Research.
    extraction. Genomics Proteomics Bioinfor-              https://github.com/LangilleLab/microbiome
    matics 14(6):371–378. https://doi.org/10.              _helper/wiki/Microbiome-Amplicon-Sequenc
    1016/j.gpb.2016.06.002                                 ing-Workflow. Accessed 15 Mar 2018
62. Bag S, Saha B, Mehta O, Anbumani D,                70. Fuks G, Elgart M, Amir A, Zeisel A, Turn-
    Kumar N, Dayal M, Pant A, Kumar P,                     baugh PJ, Soen Y, Shental N (2018) Combin-
    Saxena      S,    Allin    KH,   Hansen       T,       ing 16S rRNA gene variable regions enables
    Arumugam M, Vestergaard H, Pedersen O,                 high-resolution      microbial     community
    Pereira V, Abraham P, Tripathi R,                      profiling. Microbiome 6(1):17. https://doi.
    Wadhwa N, Bhatnagar S, Prakash VG,                     org/10.1186/s40168-017-0396-x
    Radha V, Anjana RM, Mohan V, Takeda K,             71. Cox MJ, Cookson WO, Moffatt MF (2013)
    Kurakawa T, Nair GB, Das B (2016) An                   Sequencing the human microbiome in health
    improved method for high quality metage-               and disease. Hum Mol Genet 22(R1):
    nomics DNA extraction from human and                   R88–R94. https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/
    environmental samples. Sci Rep 6:26775.                ddt398
    https://doi.org/10.1038/srep26775                  72. Vetrovsky T, Baldrian P (2013) The variability
63. Olson ND, Morrow JB (2012) DNA extract                 of the 16S rRNA gene in bacterial genomes
    characterization process for microbial detec-          and its consequences for bacterial community
    tion methods development and validation.               analyses. PLoS One 8(2):e57923. https://
    BMC Res Notes 5:668. https://doi.org/10.               doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0057923
    1186/1756-0500-5-668                               73. Taylor DL, Walters WA, Lennon NJ,
64. Shiba T, Harada S, Sugawara H, Naitow H,               Bochicchio J, Krohn A, Caporaso JG, Penna-
    Kai Y, Satow Y (2000) Crystallization and              nen T (2016) Accurate estimation of fungal
    preliminary X-ray analysis of a bacterial lyso-        diversity and abundance through improved
    zyme produced by Streptomyces globisporus.             lineage-specific primers optimized for Illu-
    Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 56                 mina amplicon sequencing. Appl Environ
    (Pt 11):1462–1463                                      Microbiol 82(24):7217–7226. https://doi.
65. Gill C, van de Wijgert JH, Blow F, Darby AC            org/10.1128/AEM.02576-16
    (2016) Evaluation of lysis methods for the         74. Louca S, Doebeli M, Parfrey LW (2018) Cor-
    extraction of bacterial DNA for analysis of            recting for 16S rRNA gene copy numbers in
    the vaginal microbiota. PLoS One 11(9):                microbiome surveys remains an unsolved
    e0163148. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour                 problem. Microbiome 6(1):41. https://doi.
    nal.pone.0163148                                       org/10.1186/s40168-018-0420-9
66. Sohrabi M, Nair RG, Samaranayake LP,               75. Chakravorty S, Helb D, Burday M,
    Zhang L, Zulfiker AH, Ahmetagic A,                     Connell N, Alland D (2007) A detailed analy-
    Good D, Wei MQ (2016) The yield and qual-              sis of 16S ribosomal RNA gene segments for
    ity of cellular and bacterial DNA extracts from        the diagnosis of pathogenic bacteria. J Micro-
    human oral rinse samples are variably affected         biol Methods 69(2):330–339. https://doi.
    by the cell lysis methodology. J Microbiol             org/10.1016/j.mimet.2007.02.005
334     Elisa Morales et al.

76. Clooney AG, Fouhy F, Sleator RD,                      differ in their ability to detect biologically
    O’Driscoll A, Stanton C, Cotter PD, Claesson          relevant    patterns.    Nat    Methods      7
    MJ (2016) Comparing apples and oranges?:              (10):813–819.      https://doi.org/10.1038/
    next generation sequencing and its impact on          nmeth.1499
    microbiome analysis. PLoS One 11(2):              87. Chen J, Bittinger K, Charlson ES,
    e0148028. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour                Hoffmann C, Lewis J, Wu GD, Collman
    nal.pone.0148028                                      RG, Bushman FD, Li H (2012) Associating
77. Whelan FJ (2014) Isolation of DNA from                microbiome composition with environmental
    Clinical Samples (Genomic Prep). Surette              covariates using generalized UniFrac dis-
    Laboratory—Microbiome & Polymicrobial                 tances. Bioinformatics 28(16):2106–2113.
    Research                                              https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
78. Surette MG (2014) Isolation of DNA from               bts342
    clinical samples (GENOMIC PREP)                   88. Chao A, Gotelli NJ, Hsieh TC, Sander EL,
79. Li H (2015) Microbiome, metagenomics, and             Ma KH, Colwell RK, Ellison AM (2014) Rar-
    high-dimensional compositional data analysis.         efaction and extrapolation with Hill numbers:
    Annu Rev Statist Appl 2(1):73–94. https://            a framework for sampling and estimation in
    doi.org/10.1146/annurev-statistics-                   species diversity studies. Ecol Monogr 84
    010814-020351                                         (1):45–67.     https://doi.org/10.1890/13-
80. Gilbert JA, Quinn RA, Debelius J, Xu ZZ,              0133.1
    Morton J, Garg N, Jansson JK, Dorrestein          89. McCoy CO, Matsen FA IV (2013)
    PC, Knight R (2016) Microbiome-wide asso-             Abundance-weighted phylogenetic diversity
    ciation studies link dynamic microbial consor-        measures distinguish microbial community
    tia to disease. Nature 535(7610):94–103.              states and are robust to sampling depth.
    https://doi.org/10.1038/nature18850                   PeerJ 1(6):e157. https://doi.org/10.7717/
81. Kaul A, Mandal S, Davidov O, Peddada SD               peerj.157
    (2017) Analysis of microbiome data in the         90. Weiss S, Xu ZZ, Peddada S, Amir A,
    presence of excess zeros. Front Microbiol             Bittinger K, Gonzalez A, Lozupone C, Zane-
    8:2114.      https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.           veld JR, Vázquez-Baeza Y, Birmingham A,
    2017.02114                                            Hyde ER, Knight R (2017) Normalization
82. Lozupone C, Lladser ME, Knights D,                    and microbial differential abundance strate-
    Stombaugh J, Knight R (2011) UniFrac: an              gies depend upon data characteristics. Micro-
    effective distance metric for microbial com-          biome 5(1):59. https://doi.org/10.1186/
    munity comparison. ISME J 5(2):169–172.               s40168-017-0237-y
    https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2010.133            91. McArdle BH, Anderson MJ (2001) Fitting
83. Xiao J, Cao H, Chen J (2017) False discovery          multivariate models to community data: a
    rate control incorporating phylogenetic tree          comment on distance-based redundancy anal-
    increases detection power in microbiome-              ysis. Ecology 82(1):290–297. https://doi.
    wide multiple testing. Bioinformatics 33              org/10.2307/2680104?ref¼no-x-route:
    (18):2873–2881. https://doi.org/10.1093/              eace2e52c544dc8ef8f1c463e5849bd9
    bioinformatics/btx311                             92. Alekseyenko AV (2016) Multivariate Welch
84. Vázquez-Baeza Y, Pirrung M, Gonzalez A,              t-test on distances. Bioinformatics 32
    Knight R (2013) EMPeror: a tool for visualiz-         (23):3552–3558. https://doi.org/10.1093/
    ing high-throughput microbial community               bioinformatics/btw524
    data. GigaScience 2(1):1–4. https://doi.          93. Tang Z-Z, Chen G, Alekseyenko AV (2016)
    org/10.1186/2047-217X-2-16                            PERMANOVA-S: association test for micro-
85. Callahan BJ, DiGiulio DB, Goltsman DSA,               bial community composition that accommo-
    Sun CL, Costello EK, Jeganathan P, Biggio             dates confounders and multiple distances.
    JR, Wong RJ, Druzin ML, Shaw GM, Steven-              Bioinformatics 32(17):2618–2625. https://
    son DK, Holmes SP, Relman DA (2017) Rep-              doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btw311
    lication and refinement of a vaginal microbial    94. Zhao N, Chen J, Carroll IM, Ringel-Kulka T,
    signature of preterm birth in two racially dis-       Epstein MP, Zhou H, Zhou JJ, Ringel Y,
    tinct cohorts of US women. Proc Natl Acad             Li H, Wu MC (2015) Testing in
    Sci U S A 114(37):9966–9971. https://doi.             microbiome-profiling studies with MiRKAT,
    org/10.1073/pnas.1705899114                           the microbiome regression-based kernel asso-
86. Kuczynski J, Liu Z, Lozupone C,                       ciation test. Am J Hum Genet 96
    McDonald D, Fierer N, Knight R (2010)                 (5):797–807.      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    Microbial community resemblance methods               ajhg.2015.04.003
                       Compositional Analysis of the Human Microbiome in Cancer Research               335

 95. White JR, Nagarajan N, Pop M (2009) Statis-             Bioinformatics 31(14):2269–2275. https://
     tical methods for detecting differentially              doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv165
     abundant features in clinical metagenomic          102. Mandal S, Van Treuren W, White RA,
     samples. PLoS Comput Biol 5(4):e1000352.                Eggesbø M, Knight R, Peddada SD (2015)
     https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.                   Analysis of composition of microbiomes: a
     1000352                                                 novel method for studying microbial compo-
 96. Love MI, Huber W, Anders S (2014) Moder-                sition. Microb Ecol Health Dis 26(0):27663.
     ated estimation of fold change and dispersion           https://doi.org/10.3402/mehd.v26.27663
     for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol          103. Chen J, King E, King E, Deek R, Deek R,
     15(12):550.         https://doi.org/10.1186/            Wei Z, Yu Y, Grill D, Grill D, Ballman K,
     s13059-014-0550-8                                       Stegle O (2018) An omnibus test for differ-
 97. Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ, Smyth GK                      ential distribution analysis of microbiome
     (2010) edgeR: a Bioconductor package for                sequencing      data.     Bioinformatics    34
     differential expression analysis of digital gene        (4):643–651. https://doi.org/10.1093/bio
     expression      data.     Bioinformatics      26        informatics/btx650
     (1):139–140. https://doi.org/10.1093/bio           104. Tsilimigras MCB, Fodor AA (2016) Compo-
     informatics/btp616                                      sitional data analysis of the microbiome: fun-
 98. Segata N, Izard J, Waldron L, Gevers D,                 damentals, tools, and challenges. Ann
     Miropolsky L, Garrett WS, Huttenhower C                 Epidemiol 26(5):330–335. https://doi.org/
     (2011) Metagenomic biomarker discovery                  10.1016/j.annepidem.2016.03.002
     and explanation. Genome Biol 12(6):R60.            105. Jonsson V, Österlund T, Nerman O, Kris-
     https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2011-12-6-                   tiansson E (2016) Statistical evaluation of
     r60                                                     methods for identification of differentially
 99. Paulson JN, Stine OC, Bravo HC, Pop M                   abundant genes in comparative metage-
     (2013) Differential abundance analysis for              nomics. BMC Genomics 17(1):1. https://
     microbial marker-gene surveys. Nat Methods              doi.org/10.1186/s12864-016-2386-y
     10(12):1200–1202.          https://doi.org/10.     106. Thorsen J, Brejnrod A, Mortensen M, Ras-
     1038/nmeth.2658                                         mussen MA, Stokholm J, Al-Soud WA,
100. Fernandes AD, Reid JN, Macklaim JM,                     Sørensen S, Bisgaard H, Waage J (2016)
     McMurrough TA, Edgell DR, Gloor GB                      Large-scale benchmarking reveals false dis-
     (2014) Unifying the analysis of high-                   coveries and count transformation sensitivity
     throughput sequencing datasets: characteriz-            in 16S rRNA gene amplicon data analysis
     ing RNA-seq, 16S rRNA gene sequencing                   methods used in microbiome studies. Micro-
     and selective growth experiments by compo-              biome 4(1):62. https://doi.org/10.1186/
     sitional data analysis. Microbiome 2(1):15.             s40168-016-0208-8
     https://doi.org/10.1186/2049-2618-2-15             107. Waldron L (2018) Data and statistical meth-
101. Sohn MB, Du R, An L (2015) A robust                     ods to analyze the human microbiome. mSys-
     approach for identifying differentially abun-           tems 3(2):e00194–e00117. https://doi.org/
     dant features in metagenomic samples.                   10.1128/mSystems.00194-17
