               life

Article
Differential Mucosal Microbiome Profiles across Stages of
Human Colorectal Cancer
Mingqing Zhang 1,2,† , Yongming Lv 2,† , Shaobin Hou 3 , Yanfei Liu 2,4 , Yijia Wang 2, * and Xuehua Wan 5, *

                                          1   Nankai University School of Medicine, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China; mqzhang@nankai.edu.cn
                                          2   Tianjin Union Medical Center, Nankai University, Tianjin 300121, China; yongminglv_9274@163.com (Y.L.);
                                              lyanfei134@163.com (Y.L.)
                                          3   Advanced Studies in Genomics, Proteomics and Bioinformatics, University of Hawaii,
                                              Honolulu, HI 96822, USA; shaobin@hawaii.edu
                                          4   Graduate School, Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin 301617, China
                                          5   TEDA Institute of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University, TEDA, Tianjin 300071, China
                                          *   Correspondence: yijiawang_1980@163.com (Y.W.); xuehua.wan@hotmail.com (X.W.)
                                          †   These authors contribute equally to this work.


                                          Abstract: Emerging evidences link gut microbiota to colorectal cancer (CRC) initiation and develop-
                                          ment. However, the CRC stage- and spatial-specific bacterial taxa were less investigated, especially in
                                          a Chinese cohort, leading to our incomplete understanding of the functional roles of gut microbiota
                                          in promoting CRC progression and recurrence. Here, we report the composition and structure of gut
                                          microbiota across CRC stages I, II and III, by analyzing the gut mucosal microbiomes of 75 triplet-
                                          paired samples collected from on-tumor, adjacent-tumor and off-tumor sites and 26 healthy controls.
                                          We observed tumor-specific pattern of mucosal microbiome profiles as CRC progressed and identified
                                ten bacterial taxa with high abundances (>1%) as potential biomarkers for tumor initiation and devel-
         
                                          opment. Peptostreptococcus and Parvimonas can serve as biomarkers for CRC stage I. Fusobacterium,
Citation: Zhang, M.; Lv, Y.; Hou, S.;     Streptococcus, Parvimonas, Burkholderiales, Caulobacteraceae, Delftia and Oxalobacteraceae can serve as
Liu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Wan, X. Differential   biomarkers for CRC stage II, while Fusobacterium, Burkholderiales, Caulobacteraceae, Oxalobacteraceae,
Mucosal Microbiome Profiles across
                                          Faecalibacterium and Sutterella can serve as biomarkers for CRC stage III. These biomarkers classified
Stages of Human Colorectal Cancer.
                                          CRC stages I, II and III distinguished from each other with an area under the receiver-operating
Life 2021, 11, 831. https://doi.org/
                                          curve (AUC) > 0.5. Moreover, co-occurrence and co-excluding network analysis of these genera
10.3390/life11080831
                                          showed strong correlations in CRC stage I, which were subsequently reduced in CRC stages II and III.
Academic Editors: Cheng-Yen Kao
                                          Our findings provide a reference index for stage-specific CRC diagnosis and suggest stage-specific
and Milan Kolář                          roles of Peptostreptococcus, Fusobacterium, Streptococcus and Parvimonas in driving CRC progression.

Received: 10 July 2021                    Keywords: gut microbiota; colorectal cancer; 16S rRNA sequencing
Accepted: 12 August 2021
Published: 13 August 2021


Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral      1. Introduction
with regard to jurisdictional claims in         Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths after lung
published maps and institutional affil-   and breast cancers, leading to a public health issue worldwide. Emerging evidences impli-
iations.
                                          cate that, besides genetic and epigenetic factors, the human gut microbiota is a primary
                                          driver of inflammation in the colon and is strongly linked to CRC risk [1,2]. Based on
                                          the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene and metagenomic sequencing, the compositions of
                                          gut mucosal and stool microbiota in CRC patients show significant differences from those
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.         in healthy individuals, suggesting that microbiome profiles plays pathological roles in
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.        CRC progression [3]. Several species associated with microbiome profiles in CRC, such as
This article is an open access article    Fusobacterium nucleatum, Peptostreptococcus anaerobius, Bacteroides fragilis and Eubacterium
distributed under the terms and           rectale, have been investigated for their physiological functions in driving colorectal car-
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                          cinogenesis [4–7].
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                                The intestinal niche contains various notable factors governing the composition of
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                          gut microbiota [8]. Compared to normal epithelial cells, cancer cells enhance expression
4.0/).




Life 2021, 11, 831. https://doi.org/10.3390/life11080831                                                        https://www.mdpi.com/journal/life
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                          2 of 17




                     levels of sialylation and high-mannose glycans, as well as decrease levels of fucosylation
                     and highly branched N-glycans. The N-glycosylation of cancer cells spreads into the
                     surrounding stroma at the invasive front of tumor, which is associated with CRC devel-
                     opmental stages [9]. In addition, tumor cells reprogram their metabolism and secrete
                     metabolites to shape tumor microenvironment (TME). Immune and non-immune cells,
                     such as macrophages, neutrophils and fibroblasts, migrate to TME and contribute to sys-
                     temic inflammation and increased oxidative stress and fibrosis [10]. The compositions of
                     immune and non-immune cells and cell-surface glycans that serve as the major carbon
                     source available to intestinal microbiota may play roles in determining the composition and
                     structure of intestinal microbiota. For example, Faecalibacterium spp. and Eubacterium spp.,
                     which belong to butyrate-producing bacteria, are well suited to colonize on normal intesti-
                     nal mucosal surfaces [11]. In contrast, certain bacteria, such as Fusobacterium nucleatum [7]
                     and Clostridium leptum [12], exhibit low ability to bind the intact wall of a healthy colon
                     but are suitable to colonize in TME with bleeding and ruptured colon wall of adenoma or
                     carcinoma. Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus (Sgg) shows low adhesion ability
                     to healthy colonocytes and remains relatively low abundance (2.5–15%) in the intestinal
                     microbiota of human [13]. When a tumor forms, Sgg exploits its pilus and collagen-binding
                     proteins to bind to collagen that is highly expressed on the surface of tumor tissues [14].
                     On the other hand, Sgg can utilize host particular metabolites such as glucose-3-phosphate
                     and fructose-6-phosphate, which are derived from increased glycolysis in tumor cells,
                     for its own proliferation [15]. Therefore, certain species in gut microbiota gain competitive
                     advantage in persistence and proliferation in TME. As TME changes during CRC develop-
                     ment, the structure alteration of gut mucosal microbiome and the consequent effect of gut
                     microbiome profiles in CRC initiation and development remain unclear.
                           To investigate whether the composition of gut mucosal microbiome exhibits a stage-
                     specific pattern in TME, we collected gut mucosal microbiomes from 7 patients diagnosed
                     at CRC stage I, 37 at CRC stage II and 31 at CRC stage III in Tianjin Union Medical Center,
                     China. For each patient, triplet-paired CRC samples were collected from on-tumor site,
                     adjacent-tumor site and off-tumor site. Additional samples were collected from 26 healthy
                     controls. Our data revealed severed profiles of microbiome structures and stage-specific
                     bacterial taxa as potential biomarkers during CRC evolution.

                     2. Materials and Methods
                     2.1. Sample Collection and DNA Library Preparation
                          The gut microbiome samples were collected from 75 CRC patients diagnosed for CRC
                     stages and 26 healthy people in Tianjin Union Medical Center. In total, 7, 37 and 31 patients
                     were diagnosed with CRC in stages I, II and III, respectively. The information was listed
                     in Table S1. As CRC patients diagnosed at stage I usually show no symptoms, not many
                     patients come to the hospital for diagnosis. We did not take samples from CRC patients
                     diagnosed at stage IV, because surgery cannot remove metastatic cancer cells (surgery is
                     meaningless). Written informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to their
                     inclusion in the study. All the protocols and procedures were approved by the Medical
                     Ethics Board of Tianjin Union Medical Center. Typical meals in Tianjin include dumplings
                     and noodles made from wheat or rice, meats and vegetables. Intestinal mucosal microbiome
                     samples were collected from on-tumor site (T), adjacent-tumor site (P) and off-tumor site
                     (N) in the same removed tissue of a given CRC patient. The average distance between T-
                     and N-sites is above 20 cm, and the shortest distance is above 17 cm. The average distance
                     between T- and P-sites is 2 cm. The healthy people were determined by colonoscopy
                     diagnosis and their intestinal microbiome samples were collected as healthy controls (H).
                          Bacterial DNA was extracted and purified using ZR Fungal/Bacterial DNA kit (Zymo
                     Research, Irvine, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and quantified us-
                     ing Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA assay kit (Thermo Fisher, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The 16S ri-
                     bosomal RNA (rRNA) gene amplicon sequencing libraries targeting the V3-V4 region were
                     prepared according to the Illumina manufactory manual. The amplification primers include
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                             3 of 17




                     forward primer, 50 TCGTCGGCAGCGTCAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGCCTA CGGGNG-
                     GCWGCAG and reverse primer 50 GTCTCGTGGGCTCGGAGATGTGTATAAGAGACA
                     GGACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC, according to the Illumina manufactory manual. The
                     amplified DNA libraries were purified using AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter, Fuller-
                     ton, CA, USA) and quantified using Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA assay kit (Thermo Fisher,
                     Sunnyvale, CA, USA).

                     2.2. OTU Picking and Analysis of 16S rRNA Amplicons
                          The amplicon libraries were bidirectionally sequenced (2 × 300 bp) on Illumina MiSeq
                     platform. The summary of reads information was listed in Table S2. Quality control
                     and filtering of raw sequencing reads were carried out using FastQC (https://www.
                     bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/, accessed on 5 June 2019). The filtered
                     paired-end reads were assembled using PandaSeq v2.10 [16] with default parameters.
                     De novo OTU (Operational Taxonomic Unit) picking, taxonomic assignment and diversity
                     analyses were carried out using QIIME v1.9.1 with Greengenes database v13.8 (http:
                     //qiime.org/home_static/dataFiles.html, accessed on 5 June 2019) [17]. In brief, assembled
                     sequences were clustered against one another without external reference sequence and
                     de novo OTUs were picked using a similarity threshold of 97%, which is commonly
                     used to define bacterial species. Chimera detection and filtering were performed using
                     USEARCH 6.1. Next, taxonomy was assigned to OTU representative sequences. Alpha
                     diversities were calculated using make_rarefaction_plots.py command from the QIIME
                     pipeline. The 16S rRNA sequencing reads have been submitted to the NCBI (National
                     Center for Biotechnology Information) SRA (Sequence Read Archive) database under
                     accession number PRJNA606879.

                     2.3. Analyses of Differential Abundances of Gut Mucosal Microbiota during CRC Development
                          The composition and structure differences of gut mucosal microbiota in different
                     CRC stages and tissue-specific sites were initially analyzed using principal component
                     analysis (PCA). The PCA was performed on R v4.0.3 using factoextra package v1.0.7 [18].
                     Relative abundance of bacterial taxa was determined using arcsine square root [3]. The
                     genera with relative abundances >0.1% identified in tumor-specific sites were analyzed
                     for Venn diagram [19]. To reveal abundance patterns of intestinal microbiota as CRC
                     progressed, the change trends of microbial abundances in tumor-specific sites were used
                     to classify the genera to four groups (group I: stage I > II > III; group II: stage I < II < III;
                     group III: stage I > II < III; group IV: stage I < II > III). Heatmap was visualized using R
                     command heatmap. Specific genera were selected to compare their abundances in the
                     three sites (N-, P- and T-sites) between CRC stages. To compare the abundances of oral
                     bacteria from individuals with CRC to their abundances in intestinal, the genera of oral
                     microbiota with top abundances from Flemer et al. were used to retrieve and compare
                     the microbial abundances on tumor-specific sites at CRC stages. The core microbiome
                     and the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) were analyzed using online
                     MicrobiomeAnalyst (https://dev.microbiomeanalyst.ca/MicrobiomeAnalyst/home.xhtml,
                     accessed on 16 May 2021) [20,21].

                     2.4. Co-Occurrence and Co-Excluding Correlation Network Analysis
                          To construct microbial correlation network, Spearman’s Rank correlation coefficient
                     matrix of the abundances of identified genera were calculated using an R package Hmisc
                     v4.5.0 (Harrell, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA). Microbial
                     correlation network analysis was carried out using Cytoscape 3.7.2 [22]. The correlation
                     strengths of co-occurrence and co-excluding interactions were determined using correlation
                     coefficient values (r > 0.2 or r < −0.2).
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                             4 of 17




                     2.5. Statistical Analysis
                           Statistical analyses were performed using statistical analysis in social science pro-
                     gram (SPSS). The statistical significances of multiple sample comparisons were calculated
                     using one-way ANOVA with Kruskal–Wallis test. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001;
                     ****, p < 0.0001.

                     3. Results
                     3.1. Gut Mucosal Microbiome Profiles during CRC Evolvement
                           As CRC evolves, tumor aberrantly grows at stages I and II, with the capacity to
                     eventually invade and spread to other parts of the human body at stage III (Figure 1A).
                     To evaluate the structure variation of spatiotemporal microbiome during CRC development,
                     we assessed microbial alpha-diversity of biopsy samples collected from on-tumor (T),
                     adjacent-tumor (P) and off-tumor (N) sites at CRC stages I, II and III. The 16S ribosomal
                     RNA gene hypervariable V3-V4 regions were sequenced and analyzed for four α-diversity
                     indices including Shannon, Phylogenetic Diversity (PD) whole tree, Chao1 and Observed
                     OTU. Analysis of species variation based on the four metrics consistently showed that
                     species diversities in specific intestinal sites of CRC patients diagnosed with different CRC
                     stages and healthy controls were not significantly different (one-way ANOVA with Kruskal–
                     Wallis test, p < 0.05) (Figure 1B–E). Although increased α-diversity in TME has been
                     reported [23], TME is not always linked to increased α-diversity [12,24–26]. In addition,
                     sampling bias and low sequencing depth miss detection of rare species in samples and
                     worsen the accuracy for estimation of α-diversity, leading to artificial differences in α-
                     diversity [27]. Our data suggest that CRC initiation and development are associated with
                     composition alteration of internal species residing in intestinal niche instead of obtaining
                     external invading species at any CRC stages.
                           We next investigated the core taxa that remained unchanged in their compositions
                     across all the samples from patients and healthy controls based on sample prevalence
                     (>20%) and relative abundance (0.01%). Besides bacteria with unassigned taxa, 12 genera
                     were identified as core taxa across all the samples, including Bacteroides, Fusobacterium,
                     Prevotella, Ruminococcus, Faecalibacterium, Peptostreptococcus, Dorea, Blautia, Streptococcus,
                     Parvimonas, Sutterella and Roseburia (Figure 1F). Among them, only Bacteroides and Ru-
                     minococcus were prevalent in more than half of the samples (Figure 1F). These data suggest
                     that, although the above α-diversity indices did not show significant variation in species
                     composition between the compared conditions (Figure 1B–E), the core taxa prevalent in
                     the samples were limited to a small number even with a low prevalence threshold (20%).
                     Thus, the abundances of the majority of bacterial species varied in the samples collected
                     from CRC patients and healthy controls.
                           To assess the dissimilarity of microbiome structure diversities (beta-diversity) in
                     specific intestinal sites during CRC development, we carried out principle component
                     analysis (PCA) for genera abundances identified in T-, P- and N-sites of CRC patients
                     diagnosed at stages I, II and III. In T-, P- and N-sites, the microbiome structure diversities
                     showed differences at stages I, II and III (Figure 2A–C). Moreover, at stages I, II and III, the
                     microbiome structure diversities in T-, P- and N-sites showed differences (Figure 2D–F).
                     Thus, microbial abundances vary both spatially and temporally during CRC development,
                     suggesting that intestinal microenvironment in CRC specific site and stage determines
                     proliferation of the favored microbial species.
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                              5 of 17




                     Figure 1. Microbial alpha-diversities showing no significant difference in on-tumor (T), adjacent-
                     tumor (P) and off-tumor (N) sites during CRC development and healthy controls (H). (A) Schematic
                     diagram showing CRC developmental process from stage I to stage III. Invasion depth increases
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                                   6 of 17




                     during CRC development and lymph node metastasis occurs in CRC stage III leading to distant
                     metastasis. (B). Alpha diversity evaluated using Shannon diversity index. (C). Alpha diversity
                     evaluated using PD whole tree index. (D). Alpha diversity evaluated using Chao1 index. (E). Alpha
                     diversity evaluated using Observed OTU index. (F). Core microbiome analysis showing a limited
                     number of genera prevalent across all the samples. Sample prevalence threshold is set up above
                     20%, and relative abundance threshold is set up above 0.01%. The heatmap colors represent the
                     sample prevalence values. A: CRC stage I; B: CRC stage II; C: CRC stage III. N: off-tumor site;
                     P: adjacent-tumor site; T: on-tumor site. PD: Phylogenetic Diversity. Alpha-diversity differences were
                     compared using one-way ANOVA with Kruskal–Wallis test, p > 0.05.




                     Figure 2. PCA showing microbiome profiles during CRC development. (A–C) PCA showing
                     microbial diversity at off-tumor site (A), adjacent-tumor site (B) and on-tumor site (C) among CRC
                     stages I, II and III. (D–F) showing microbial diversity at CRC stage I (D), II (E) and III (F) among
                     off-tumor, adjacent-tumor and on-tumor sites. A: stage I; B: stage II; C: stage III. N: off-tumor site;
                     P: adjacent-tumor site; T: on-tumor site. PCA: principle component analysis.
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                                                 7 of 17




                                  3.2. Genera with Top Abundances Showing Differential Abundances during CRC Progression
                                        To examine microbial differential abundances at genus level, we compared the top
                                  10 most abundant genera from T-, P- and N-sites at CRC stages I, II and III and healthy
                                  controls (Figure 3A). A total of 14 genera were compared, including Akkemansia, Bacteroides,
                                  Citrobacter, Delftia, Dorea, Faecalibacterium, Fusobacterium, Parvimonas, Peptostreptococcus, Pre-
                                  votella, Ruminococcus, Shewanella, Streptococcus and Sutterella. Among them, Bacteroides was
                                  the most abundant genus (~20%), showing little variation between conditions (Figure 3A).
                                  Akkemanisia, Dorea, Prevotella, Streptococcus and Sutterella showed the highest abundances
                                  in T-site at CRC stage I (Figure 3A). Parvimonas and Peptostreptococcus showed the highest
                                  abundances in T-site at CRC stage II (Figure 3A). Citrobacter, Fusobacterium and Shewannella
                                  showed the highest abundances in T-site at CRC stage III (Figure 3A). When the genera with
                                  abundances >0.1% in T-site at CRC stages I, II and III and those in healthy controls were
                                  compared, 37 were shared among all the four conditions (Figure 3B, Table S3), consistent
                                  with the above data that, although the abundances of species may vary as CRC develops,
                                  the alpha diversities showed no significant differences between conditions. Moreover, only
                                  12, 4, 7 and 8 genera with abundances >0.1% were uniquely present in healthy controls and
                                  T-site at CRC stages I, II and III, respectively (Figure 3B, Table S3).




      Figure 3. Comparison of the most abundant genera identified in each condition. (A). Abundance comparison of the top
      10 genera in each condition. (B). Venn diagram visualizing comparison of genera with abundance >0.1% among CRC stages
      I, II and III at on-tumor site (T) and healthy controls. A: CRC stage I; B: CRC stage II; C: CRC stage III. N: off-tumor site;
      P: adjacent-tumor site; T: on-tumor site. H: healthy control.

                                  3.3. Altered Microbial Signatures in Different CRC Stages
                                       Next, we compared the microbiome changes in T-, P- and N-sites at CRC stages I,
                                  II and III, and healthy controls at genus level. The microbiome abundances did not show the
                                  same trends in the three sites when they were compared among the CRC stages (Figure 4).
                                  We classified the genera to four groups based on the change trends of their abundances in
                                  the T-site (group I: stage I > II > III, group II: stage I < II < III, group III: stage I > II < III,
                                  and group IV: stage I < II >III) (Figure 4A–D). In the T-site, groups I, II and III bacteria
                                  adapted well to proliferating in TME at CRC stage III, I, and II, respectively, whereas
                                  group IV bacteria showed the least adaptation to TME at CRC stage II (Figure 4A–D).
                                  For further understanding the physiological roles of bacteria identified in the four groups
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                                                8 of 17




                                  (Figure 4A–D), information regarding their metabolism and pathogenicity was listed in
                                  Table S4. These data suggest that CRC stage-specific microenvironment is associated
                                  with the enrichment of stage-specific species. As CRC develops, the abundances of some
                                  butyrate-producing bacteria (Coprococcus and Anaerostipes) decreased, and some (Moryella
                                  and Megasphaera) increased, whereas the abundances of pathogenic bacteria (Citrobacter,
                                  Klebsiella and Stenotrophomonas) increased. Notably, many of the latter were opportunistic
                                  pathogens that permeate broken intestinal wall in T-site to induce proinflammation in TME.




      Figure 4. Microbiome abundances showing differential changing trends in on-tumor, adjacent-tumor and off-tumor sites
      when compared among CRC stages I, II and III. Heatmap visualizing abundance changes in all the conditions. (A). Genera
      abundances in on-tumor site at CRC stage I > II > III. (B). Genera abundances in on-tumor site at CRC stage I < II < III.
      (C). Genera abundances in on-tumor site at CRC stage I > II < III. (D). Genera abundances in on-tumor site at CRC stage
      I < II > III. A: CRC stage I; B: CRC stage II; C: CRC stage III. N: off-tumor site; P: adjacent-tumor site; T: on-tumor site.
      H: healthy control.

                                       We next carried out the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) method
                                  to predict biomarkers that have potentials for diagnosis of CRC stages. By setting LDA
                                  score > 4.0, a total of 43 genera were identified with significant differential abundances in
                                  specific sites and CRC stages (p < 0.05) (Figure 5). Among them, Fusobacterium, Peptostrepto-
                                  coccus, Streptococcus, Campylobacter, Gemella, Treponema, TG5, Leptotrichia and Mogibacteri-
                                  aceae showed higher abundances in T-site than in N- or P-sites, whereas the abundances of
                                  the other genera or families with unknown genus decreased in T-site compared to those
                                  in N- or P-sites (Figure 5). The abundances of Fusobacterium in T-site, as the only genus,
                                  consistently increased from CRC stage I to III (Figure 5). Peptostreptococcus, Streptococcus,
                                  Campylobacter, Gemella and Leptotrichia showed the highest abundances in T-site at CRC
                                  stage I with decreased abundances in T-site at CRC stages II and III (Figure 5). Treponema,
                                  TG5 and Mogibacteriaceae showed the highest abundances in T-site at CRC stage II (Figure 5).
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                                                 9 of 17




      Figure 5. LEfSe analysis showing the genera or families with unknown genus with significant differential abundances in
      N-, P- or T-sites at CRC stages I, II and III. The colors in the heatmap represent the abundances of genera/families with
      unknown genus. A: CRC stage I; B: CRC stage II; C: CRC stage III. N: off-tumor site; P: adjacent-tumor site; T: on-tumor site.
      H: healthy control. LefSe: the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size.

                                        As the microbial abundance patterns in T-site varied among CRC stages, we next
                                  aimed to identify CRC-stage specific potential markers at genus level to facilitate CRC-
                                  stage diagnose. To avoid variation noise of microbiome structure caused by individual
                                  difference, the optimized method is comparing the microbial abundances in T-site to those
                                  in P- or N-sites instead of healthy controls. Using this method, we identified 10 gen-
                                  era or families with abundance > 1% that showed significant differences in abundance
                                  between T-site and P/N-site in certain CRC stage (Figure 6, Figure S1). Fusobacterium
                                  in T-site showed significantly higher abundances than those in N-site at CRC stage II
                                  and those in P- and N-tumor sites at CRC stage III (Figure 6). However, at CRC stage
                                  I, the abundances of Fusobacterium in the three sites were not distinguishable (Figure 6).
                                  Additionally, Peptostreptococcus, Parvimonas and Streptococcus in T-site showed increased
                                  abundances and can serve as biomarkers for stages I, I-II and II, respectively (Figure 6,
                                  Figure S1). Other six genera/families with unknown genus showed decreased abundances
                                  in T-site compared to P/N-sites. Burkholderiales, Caulobacteraceae, Oxalobacteraceae can serve
                                  as biomarkers for CRC stages II and III (Figure 6, Figure S1). Delftia can serve as biomarker
                                  for CRC stage II, while Faecalibacterium and Sutterella can serve as biomarkers for CRC
                                  stage III (Figure S1). Using these ten genera/families with unknown genus as biomarkers,
                                  we performed receiver-operating characteristic analyses and CRC Stages I, II and III were
                                  distinguished from each other (Figure 7).
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                                          10 of 17




      Figure 6. Abundance change analysis of CRC stage-specific biomarkers including Fusobacterium, Streptococcus, Peptostrep-
      tococcus and Burkholderiales. A: CRC stage I; B: CRC stage II; C: CRC stage III. N: off-tumor site; P: adjacent-tumor
      site; T: on-tumor site. H: healthy control. Abundance change differences were compared using one-way ANOVA with
      Kruskal–Wallis test, *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.1; ***, p < 0.01; ****, p < 0.001.
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                                       11 of 17




                     Figure 7. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis showing diagnostic performance of Fu-
                     sobacterium, Peptostreptococcus, Streptococcus, Parvimonas, Burkholderiales, Caulobacteraceae, Delftia,
                     Faecalibacterium, Oxalobacteraceae and Sutterella to differentiate stage I and II (A), I and III (B), and II
                     and III (C). AUC are above 0.5. AUC: areas under the receiver-operating curve.

                     3.4. Oral Microbes Compared to Gut Mucosal Microbes in CRC Stages
                          Oral bacteria are able to cross the gastric mucosal barrier to enter and colonize in the
                     colon [28]. We next examined whether the most abundant oral bacteria from individuals
                     with CRC were present in T-site at CRC stages. Among the top 10 abundant oral bacteria,
                     only Streptococcus, Prevotella and Fusobacterium were present in T-site with abundances
                     >2% (Figure 8A). Only Fusobacterium in T-site at CRC stage III showed significantly higher
                     abundance than that in oral cavity, whereas Fusobacterium at CRC stage II showed similar
                     abundance to that in oral cavity (Figure 8A). Moreover, Fusobacterium in T-site at CRC stage
                     I showed lower abundance than that in oral cavity (Figure 8A). Using these top abundant
                     oral genera as markers, we performed receiver-operating characteristic analyses and CRC
                     stages I, II and III were distinguished from oral cavity (Figure 8B–D).
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                                                  12 of 17




      Figure 8. Abundance comparison of the top abundant oral bacteria among those in on-tumor sites at CRC stages I, II
      and III. (A). Abundance change comparison. (B–D) Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis showing diagnostic
      performance of the top abundant oral bacteria, to differentiate CRC stage I and oral cavity (B), II and oral cavity (C), and III
      and oral cavity (D). Areas under the receiver-operating curve are 0.89 (B), 0.91 (C) and 0.92 (D). A: CRC stage I; B: CRC
      stage II; C: CRC stage III. N: off-tumor site; P: adjacent-tumor site; T: on-tumor site. H: healthy control. AUC: areas under
      the receiver-operating curve.

                                   3.5. Co-Occurrence and Co-Excluding Alteration of Gut Microbes during CRC Development
                                         As bacterial co-occurrence and co-excluding interactions in mixed-species populations
                                   are essential to reveal bacterial competitions and maintenance of community composition,
                                   we next examined co-occurrence and co-excluding interaction networks among pairwise
                                   bacterial markers for CRC-specific stages in T-, P- and N-sites during CRC progression. In T-
                                   site, bacteria exhibited more interaction relationships and higher Spearman rank correlation
                                   values at CRC stage I than those at CRC stages II and III (Figure 9), which was also observed
                                   when more genera (abundance > 0.1%) were analyzed (Figure S2), suggesting profiles of
                                   gut mucosal microbiomes occurred during CRC progression. In P- and N-sites, bacteria
                                   showed similar relationship patterns to those in the T-site (Figure S3). These results were
                                   consistent with the above observation that the abundances of four biomarkers increased
                                   and those of other bacterial markers went down during CRC progression. Thus, certain
                                   factors from intestinal mucosal microenvironment shared among the T-, N- and P-sites
                                   lead to the same interaction pattern in the survival of coexisting species and depletion
                                   of excluding species. At CRC stage I, Fusobacterium served as the scaffolding bacterium
                                   that positively correlated with the highest number of bacteria (r > 0.4, edge degree = 5) in
                                   T-site, including Parvimons, Caulobacteraceae and Oxalobacteraceae with strongest strengths
                                   (r > 0.6), as well as Delftia and Streptococcus with less strong relationships (0.6 > r > 0.4)
                                   (Figure 9A). However, these strong co-occurrence relationships lost at CRC stages II and III
                                   (r > 0.4) (Figure 9B,C). In T-site, Fusobacterium showed weak positive relationships with
                                   Parvimonas and Streptococcus (0.4 > r > 0.2) at CRC stage II, and with Streptococcus and
                                   Peptostreptococcus (0.4 > r > 0.2) at CRC stage III (Figure 9B,C). At CRC stage I, Fusobacterium
                                   showed strong positive relationships with Peptostreptococcus, Parvimonas, Caulobacteraceae,
                                   Oxalobacteraceae and Burkholderiales in N-site (r > 0.4), and with Sutterella, Caulobacteraceae
                                   and Burkholderiales in P-site (r > 0.6) (Figure S3). Consistently, Fusobacterium only showed
                                   weak positive relationships with Parvimonas, Peptostreptococcus and Streptococcus in N- and
                                   P-sites at CRC stages II and III (0.4 > r > 0.2) (Figure S3).
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                                              13 of 17




      Figure 9. Co-occurrence and co-excluding interaction networks of CRC stage-specific markers showing profiles of micro-
      biome in on-tumor site during CRC progression. (A). Co-occurrence and co-excluding interaction networks at CRC stage I.
      (B). Co-occurrence and co-excluding interaction networks at CRC stage II. (C). Co-occurrence and co-excluding interaction
      networks at CRC stage III. Bacteria pairs with Spearman rank correlation >0.2 or <−0.2 are represented in the network.
      Edges represent co-occurrence or co-excluding interaction relationships between bacteria pairs. Cytoscape v3.7.2 was used
      for co-occurrence and co-excluding interaction network construction. The size of the nodes corresponds to edge degree.

                                 4. Discussion
                                       Early detection and treatment of CRC can improve survival rates for patients, e.g.,
                                 >90% surviving at 5 years for patients diagnosed with stage I versus 50% surviving at 5
                                 years for those with stage III [29,30]. Thus, discovering new bacterial biomarkers associated
                                 with specific CRC stages will facilitate accurate diagnosis of CRC and staging. On the other
                                 hand, studies on the functional roles of these pathogenic bacteria in CRC development
                                 will help develop feasible treatment of CRC and prevent its recurrence. In this work,
                                 to avoid the noise brought by inter-individual variations in gut mucosal microbiome,
                                 we analyzed gut mucosal microbiomes of triplet-paired biopsy samples collected from
                                 on-tumor (T), adjacent-tumor (P) and off-tumor (N) sites of CRC patients to identify
                                 potential biomarkers for CRC stages. Our results establish a set of bacterial taxa as potential
                                 biomarkers specific for CRC stages I, II and III. PCA analysis of composition structures of
                                 gut mucosal microbiomes showed differences in T-, P- and N-sites at the same stage, as
                                 well as in the same site as stage changes, suggesting that there are differential abundances
                                 of bacterial genera associated with specific sites as CRC develops. We identified 10 bacterial
                                 genera/families with unknown genus with top abundances (>1%) as biomarkers for CRC
                                 stages, including Peptostreptococcus (stage I), Parvimonas (stages I and II), Streptococcus
                                 (stage II), Delftia (stage II), Fusobacterium (stages II and III), Burkholderiales (stages II and III),
                                 Caulobacteraceae (stages II and III), Oxalobacteraceae (stages II and III), Faecalibacterium (stage
                                 III) and Sutterella (stage III). Our analyses of co-occurrence and co-excluding interaction
                                 networks further showed a loss-of-interaction pattern in T-site as well as in N- and P-sites
                                 during CRC development, indicating TME-associated microbial profiles occur differentially
                                 in CRC stages.
                                       The CRC-stage specific biomarkers characterized in this work reflect that Peptostrepto-
                                 coccus, instead of notorious human pathogen Fusobacterium, showed significantly differ-
                                 ential abundances between T- and N-sites at CRC stage I, although both of them showed
                                 higher abundances in T-site than those in healthy controls at CRC stage I. At CRC stages
                                 II and III, Peptostreptococcus only showed higher abundances in T-site than healthy con-
                                 trols, whereas Fusobacterium showed significantly differential abundances between T- and
                                 N-sites/healthy controls. These data indicate that Peptostreptococcus serves as the major
                                 driver for tumor progression at early-stage CRC, and its role is gradually replaced by
                                 Fusobacterium and others at late-stage CRC. The oncogenic potential of Peptostreptococcus
                                 anaeerobius has been investigated using a mouse model, which confirmed that P. anaeero-
                                 bius is able to promote proliferation of colonic epithelial cells and modulate the immune
                                 microenvironment [5]. Fusobacterium nucleatum, well recognized as a key pathogen in
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                                   14 of 17




                     gingivitis and periodontitis, has recently drawn attentions on its role in CRC tumorigenesis
                     and metastasis [31–36]. Our findings indicate that a well-established TME is more suitable
                     for Fusobacterium proliferation that further modulates proinflammatory TME for metastasis,
                     whereas the role of Peptostreptococcus may be masked by the highly abundant Fusobacterium
                     (10% vs. 2% Peptostreptococcus, Figure 3A) in late-stage CRC.
                           Additionally, Parvimonas (stages I and II) and Streptococcus (stage II) with top abun-
                     dances in gut mucosal microbiome were identified as biomarkers for specific CRC stages
                     in this study. Parvimonas micros is commonly found in the commensal flora of the gingi-
                     val crevice and frequently isolated in polymicrobial periodontitis [37]. Recent evidence
                     suggests that P. micros significantly promotes proliferation of colon cell lines NCM460,
                     HT-29 and Caco-2 and enhances gut inflammation [38]. Sgg relies on its type VII secretion
                     systems to promote its adherence to HT29 cells and stimulate HT29 cell proliferation [39].
                     Moreover, Sgg was shown to prefer TME for colonization at the expense of resident intesti-
                     nal enterococci, by secreting an active bacteriocin in bile acids [40]. Thus, Parvimonas and
                     Streptococcus are involved in establishing TME in CRC stages I-II and II.
                           The remaining CRC stage-specific biomarkers including, Burkholderiales, Caulobacter-
                     aceae, Oxalobacteraceae, Delftia, Faecalibacterium and Sutterella, showed lower abundances
                     in T-site than N- or P- sites. As their abundances and tumor progression are negatively
                     correlated, their roles associated with gut microbiome profiles and tumorigenesis are less
                     well characterized. A few studies suggest that Faecalibacterium plays a major role in the
                     regulation of gut barrier, inflammation and metabolic functions [41]. Sutterella, associated
                     with gastrointestinal diseases, does not induce substantial inflammation but has a capacity
                     to degrade IgA [42]. Further characterization of the functional roles of these genera in
                     TME and their excluding interactions with Fusobacterium at late stage of CRC that involve
                     interspecies competitions will help understand the factors that result in their depletion in
                     the community.
                           The bacterial density in the colon reaches extremely high level, viz 1011 bacterial cells
                     per 1 mL colon content [43], indicating that gut mucosal microbiota may form biofilm-
                     like structure and bacteria physically interact with each other. Bacterial co-occurring and
                     co-excluding interactions in the networks of mixed-species populations may reflect CRC
                     stage-specific TME statuses and serve as a CRC stage-specific indicator. We identified a
                     loss-of-interaction pattern for CRC progression in the T-, P- and N-sites, indicating the
                     profiles of gut microbiota severed as CRC evolves. Fusobacterium maintained a weak
                     co-occurrence interaction with Peptostreptococcus, Streptococcus and Parvimonas in the T-,
                     P- and N-sites at CRC stage III. F. nucleatum functions as a bridge-forming bacterium to
                     interact with other bacterial colonizers, leading to most complex biofilm formation in the
                     human body [44,45]. It is postulated that Fusobacterium in the colon of CRC patients comes
                     from the oral cavity due to its absence in healthy colon and its abundance in human oral
                     cavity [46]. However, because our sequencing depth is deep enough, we find Fusobacterium
                     in healthy controls, revealing that this genus resides in healthy colon with low abundance
                     instead of translocation from the oral cavity through gastric mucosal barrier or blood at
                     any stage of CRC. Our data further reveal that the abundance of Fusobacterium in T-site
                     at CRC stage III but not in other conditions is higher than those in oral cavity with CRC
                     (Figure 3A). However, the absolute total number of bacteria in colon is higher than that
                     in oral cavity (1011 CFU/mL in colon vs 107 CFU/mL in oral cavity) [47,48]. Therefore,
                     the absolute number of Fusobacterium in colon is higher than that in oral cavity. Since the
                     compositions of both bacterial communities and eukaryotic cells in colon and oral cavity
                     are respectively distinct, Fusobacterium may play different roles in colon and oral cavity.
                     The TME at CRC stage III may favor F. nucleatum proliferation that functions as a bridge
                     to form multi-species biofilm containing pathogenic Peptostreptococcus, Streptococcus and
                     Parvimonas. However, these bacteria thrive at the expense of other species.
                           Our analyses showed a gradual switch of microbial profiles during CRC progression
                     and classified bacterial taxa to four groups (group I: stage I > II > III; group II: stage I < II < III;
                     group III: stage I > II < III; group IV: stage I < II > III) (Figure 4A–D, Table S4). The group I
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                                 15 of 17




                     bacteria gradually lose growth advantage as CRC develops and TME changes, suggesting
                     these bacteria may function as either probiotics (e.g., Bacteroides and Ruminococcus) or
                     pathogenic bacteria (e.g., Prevotella and Eubacterium) adapted to early TME (Table S4). Their
                     proliferation abilities are outcompeted by group II bacteria that gradually increase the
                     relative abundances as TME changes. Besides Fusobacterium, group II bacteria contain
                     several famous pathogenic genera in human infectious diseases, such as Klebsiella, Pseu-
                     domonas, Vibrio and Mycobacterium that produce known virulence factors in response to
                     host immune systems (Table S4). These bacteria show highest proliferation abilities in CRC
                     stage III with the most complex TME containing immune cells with migratory capacities
                     such as macrophages, neutrophils and fibroblasts. Their pathogenicity may play roles in
                     shaping the late TME and involving metastases. Intriguingly, group III and IV bacteria
                     show the lowest and highest abundances in CRC stage II, respectively, indicating that the
                     complex TME in stage III benefits the proliferation of group III bacteria but impairs group
                     IV bacterial growth. Group IV bacteria contain several famous pathogenic genera in human
                     infectious diseases such as Streptococcus, Campylobacter and Clostridium (Table S4). These
                     bacteria may drive early CRC development but gradually lose adaptation to TME in CRC
                     stage III.
                          Our study defines the gut mucosal community in stage-specific CRC for tumorigenesis.
                     We identified CRC stage-specific biomarkers that have potentials for clinical diagnosis
                     and showed profiles of gut mucosal microbiome as CRC progresses. In future work,
                     collection of larger sizes of samples along with experimental validation will help to provide
                     a more accurate profile of CRC-stage associated biomarkers. In addition, further functional
                     analyses of interplay between gut microbes and host immune cells will help understand
                     the roles of gut microbiomes in human diseases.

                     Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/
                     10.3390/life11080831/s1, Figure S1: Abundance change analysis of CRC stage-specific biomarkers.
                     Figure S2: Co-occurrence and co-excluding interaction networks of genera with abundance >0.1%
                     showing profiles of microbiome in on-tumor site during CRC progression. Figure S3: Co-occurrence
                     and co-excluding interaction networks of CRC stage-specific markers showing profiles of microbiome
                     in adjacent-tumor site and off-tumor site during CRC progression. Table S1: Summary of CRC
                     patients and healthy people. Table S2: Summary of assembled reads numbers. Table S3: List of
                     genera/families with unknown genus shared among CRC stages I, II and III at on-tumor site (T) and
                     healthy controls. Table S4: Summary of bacterial taxa identified in four groups shown in Figure 4.
                     Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Y.W. and X.W.; methodology, M.Z., Y.L. (Yongming Lv),
                     Y.L. (Yanfei Liu)., S.H., Y.W. and X.W.; software, M.Z., Y.L. (Yongming Lv), Y.L. (Yanfei Liu), S.H.,
                     Y.W. and X.W.; validation, M.Z., Y.L. (Yongming Lv), Y.L. (Yanfei Liu), S.H., Y.W. and X.W.; formal
                     analysis, M.Z., Y.L. (Yongming Lv), Y.L. (Yanfei Liu), S.H., Y.W. and X.W.; investigation, Y.W. and
                     X.W.; resources, S.H. and X.W.; data curation, M.Z., Y.L. (Yongming Lv), Y.L. (Yanfei Liu), S.H., Y.W.
                     and X.W.; writing—original draft preparation, Y.W. and X.W.; writing—review and editing, Y.W. and
                     X.W.; visualization, Y.W. and X.W.; supervision, S.H., Y.W. and X.W.; project administration, S.H.,
                     Y.W. and X.W.; funding acquisition, Y.W. and X.W. All authors have read and agreed to the published
                     version of the manuscript.
                     Funding: This work was partially funded by the Natural Science Foundation of China Grant number
                     81972826, Tianjin 131 Innovative Talent Training Project in 2018, and the Fundamental Research
                     Funds for the Central Universities, Nankai University Grant number 63191440.
                     Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the
                     Declaration of Helsinki, and approved by the Medical Ethics Board of Tianjin Union Medical Center.
                     Approval Code: B20.
                     Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the
                     study. Written informed consent has been obtained from the patients to publish this paper.
                     Data Availability Statement: The 16S rRNA sequencing reads have been submitted to the NCBI
                     SRA database under accession number PRJNA606879. All the data are provided in this manuscript
                     and Supplementary Materials.
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                                                   16 of 17




                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Schwabe, R.F.; Jobin, C. The microbiome and cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2013, 13, 800–812. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Irrazabal, T.; Belcheva, A.; Girardin, S.E.; Martin, A.; Philpott, D.J. The multifaceted role of the intestinal microbiota in colon
      cancer. Mol. Cell 2014, 54, 309–320. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.    Nakatsu, G.; Li, X.; Zhou, H.; Sheng, J.; Wong, S.H.; Wu, W.K.K.; Ng, S.C.; Tsoi, H.; Dong, Y.; Zhang, N.; et al. Gut mucosal
      microbiome across stages of colorectal carcinogenesis. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 8727. [CrossRef]
4.    Zhang, S.; Cai, S.; Ma, Y. Association between Fusobacterium nucleatum and colorectal cancer: Progress and future directions.
      J. Cancer 2018, 9, 1652–1659. [CrossRef]
5.    Long, X.; Wong, C.C.; Tong, L.; Chu, E.S.H.; Szeto, C.H.; Go, M.Y.Y.; Coker, O.O.; Chan, A.W.H.; Chan, F.K.; Sung, J.J.Y.; et al.
      Peptostreptococcus anaerobius promotes colorectal carcinogenesis and modulates tumour immunity. Nat. Microbiol. 2019, 4, 12.
      [CrossRef]
6.    Rhee, K.-J.; Wu, S.; Wu, X.; Huso, D.L.; Karim, B.; Franco, A.A.; Rabizadeh, S.; Golub, J.E.; Mathews, L.E.; Shin, J.; et al. Induction
      of Persistent Colitis by a Human Commensal, Enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis, in Wild-Type C57BL/6 Mice. Infect. Immun.
      2009, 77, 1708–1718. [CrossRef]
7.    Wang, Y.; Wan, X.; Wu, X.; Zhang, C.; Liu, J.; Hou, S. Eubacterium rectale contributes to colorectal cancer initiation via promoting
      colitis. Gut Pathog. 2021, 13, 1–11. [CrossRef]
8.    Dong, X.; Pan, P.; Zheng, D.-W.; Bao, P.; Zeng, X.; Zhang, X.-Z. Bioinorganic hybrid bacteriophage for modulation of intestinal
      microbiota to remodel tumor-immune microenvironment against colorectal cancer. Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, eaba1590. [CrossRef]
9.    Boyaval, F.; Van Zeijl, R.; Dalebout, H.; Holst, S.; Van Pelt, G.W.; Fariña-Sarasqueta, A.; Mesker, W.E.; Tollenaar, R.; Morreau,
      H.; Wuhrer, M.; et al. N-glycomic signature of stage II colorectal cancer and its association with the tumor microenvironment.
      Mol. Cell. Proteom. 2021, 20, 100057. [CrossRef]
10.   Kasprzak, A. The Role of Tumor Microenvironment Cells in Colorectal Cancer (CRC) Cachexia. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 1565.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.   Zhang, H.; Chang, Y.; Zheng, Q.; Hu, C.; Jia, W. Altered intestinal microbiota associated with colorectal cancer. Front. Med. 2019,
      13, 461–470. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Pascual, L.M.; Cabrera-Rubio, R.; Ocon, S.; Costales, P.; Parra, A.; Suarez, A.; Moris, F.; Rodrigo, L.; Mira, A.; Collado, M.C.
      Microbial mucosal colonic shifts associated with the development of colorectal cancer reveal the presence of different bacterial
      and archaeal biomarkers. J. Gastroenterol. 2015, 50, 167–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   Pasquereau-Kotula, E.; Martins, M.; Aymeric, L.; Dramsi, S. Significance of Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus association
      with colorectal cancer. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 614. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Boleij, A.; Muytjens, C.M.J.; Bukhari, S.I.; Cayet, N.; Glaser, P.; Hermans, P.W.M.; Swinkels, D.W.; Bolhuis, A.; Tjalsma, H.
      Novel clues on the specific association of Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp gallolyticus with colorectal cancer. J. Infect. Dis. 2011,
      203, 1101–1109. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.   Boleij, A.; Dutilh, B.E.; Kortman, G.A.M.; Roelofs, R.; Laarakkers, C.M.; Engelke, U.F.; Tjalsma, H. Bacterial responses to a
      simulated colon tumor microenvironment. Mol. Cell. Proteom. 2012, 11, 851–862. [CrossRef]
16.   Masella, A.P.; Bartram, A.K.; Truszkowski, J.M.; Brown, D.G.; Neufeld, J.D. PANDAseq: Paired-end assembler for illumina
      sequences. BMC Bioinform. 2012, 13, 31. [CrossRef]
17.   Caporaso, J.G.; Kuczynski, J.; Stombaugh, J.; Bittinger, K.; Bushman, F.; Costello, E.K.; Fierer, N.; Peña, A.G.; Goodrich, J.K.;
      Gordon, J.I.; et al. QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing data. Nat. Methods 2010, 7, 335–336.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.   Lê, S.; Josse, J.; Husson, F. FactoMineR: An R package for multivariate analysis. J. Stat. Softw. 2008, 25, 1–18. [CrossRef]
19.   Bardou, P.; Mariette, J.; Escudié, F.; Djemiel, C.; Klopp, C. jvenn: An interactive Venn diagram viewer. BMC Bioinform. 2014,
      15, 293. [CrossRef]
20.   Chong, J.; Liu, P.; Zhou, G.; Xia, J. Using MicrobiomeAnalyst for comprehensive statistical, functional, and meta-analysis of
      microbiome data. Nat. Protoc. 2020, 15, 799–821. [CrossRef]
21.   Dhariwal, A.; Chong, J.; Habib, S.; King, I.L.; Agellon, L.B.; Xia, J. Microbiome Analyst—A web-based tool for comprehensive
      statistical, visual and meta-analysis of microbiome data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017, 45, W180–W188. [CrossRef]
22.   Shannon, P.; Markiel, A.; Ozier, O.; Baliga, N.S.; Wang, J.T.; Ramage, D.; Amin, N.; Schwikowski, B.; Ideker, T. Cytoscape: A
      software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res. 2003, 13, 2498–2504. [CrossRef]
23.   Hibberd, A.A.; Lyra, A.; Ouwehand, A.; Rolny, P.; Lindegren, H.; Cedgård, L.; Wettergren, Y. Intestinal microbiota is altered in
      patients with colon cancer and modified by probiotic intervention. BMJ Open Gastroenterol. 2017, 4, e000145. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Gagnière, J.; Raisch, J.; Veziant, J.; Barnich, N.; Bonnet, R.; Buc, E.; Bringer, M.-A.; Pezet, D.; Bonnet, M. Gut microbiota imbalance
      and colorectal cancer. World J. Gastroenterol. 2016, 22, 501–518. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.   Lu, Y.; Chen, J.; Zheng, J.; Hu, G.; Wang, J.; Huang, C.; Lou, L.; Wang, X.; Zeng, Y. Mucosal adherent bacterial profiles in patients
      with colorectal adenomas. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 26337.
26.   Chen, W.; Liu, F.; Ling, Z.; Tong, X.; Xiang, C. Human intestinal lumen and mucosa-associated microbiota in patients with
      colorectal cancer. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e39743. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Life 2021, 11, 831                                                                                                                         17 of 17




27.   Finotello, F.; Mastrorilli, E.; Camillo, B.D. Measuring the diversity of the human microbiota with targeted next-generation
      sequencing. Brief. Bioinform. 2018, 19, 679–692. [CrossRef]
28.   Peng, M.; Tabashsum, Z.; Patel, P.; Bernhardt, C.; Biswas, C.; Meng, J.; Biswas, D. Prevention of enteric bacterial infections and
      modulation of gut microbiota with conjugated linoleic acids producing Lactobacillus in mice. Gut Microbes 2020, 11, 433–452.
      [CrossRef]
29.   Howlader, N.; Noone, A.M.; Krapcho, M.; Miller, D.; Bishop, K.; Altekruse, S.F.; Kosary, C.L.; Yu, M.; Ruhl, J.; Tatalovich, Z.; et al.
      SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–2013; National Cancer Institute: Bethesda, MD, USA, 2016. Available online: https://seer.
      cancer.gov/archive/csr/1975_2013 (accessed on 18 June 2021).
30.   Siegel, R.L.; Miller, K.D.; Fedewa, S.A.; Ahnen, D.J.; Meester, R.G.S.; Barzi, A.; Jemal, A. Colorectal cancer statistics. CA Cancer J. Clin.
      2017, 67, 177–193. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.   Moore, W.E.C.; Moore, L.V.H. The bacteria of periodontal diseases. Periodontology 1994, 5, 66–77. [CrossRef]
32.   Kostic, A.D.; Chun, E.; Robertson, L.; Glickman, J.N.; Gallini, C.A.; Michaud, M.; Clancy, T.E.; Chung, D.C.; Lochhead, P.;
      Hold, G.L.; et al. Fusobacterium nucleatum potentiates intestinal tumorigenesis and modulates the tumor-immune microenviron-
      ment. Cell Host Microbe 2013, 14, 207–215. [CrossRef]
33.   Mima, K.; Nishihara, R.; Qian, Z.R.; Cao, Y.; Sukawa, Y.; Nowak, J.A.; Yang, J.; Dou, R.; Masugi, Y.; Song, M.; et al. Fusobacterium
      nucleatum in colorectal carcinoma tissue and patient prognosis. Gut 2016, 65, 1973–1980. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.   Mima, K.; Sukawa, Y.; Nishihara, R.; Qian, Z.R.; Yamauchi, M.; Inamura, K.; Kim, S.A.; Masuda, A.; Nowak, J.A.; Nosho, K.; et al.
      Fusobacterium nucleatum and T cells in colorectal carcinoma. JAMA Oncol. 2015, 1, 653–661. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.   Rubinstein, M.R.; Wang, X.; Liu, W.; Hao, Y.; Cai, G.; Han, Y.W. Fusobacterium nucleatum promotes colorectal carcinogenesis by
      modulating E-cadherin/β-catenin signaling via its FadA adhesin. Cell Host Microbe 2013, 14, 195–206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.   Casasanta, M.A.; Yoo, C.C.; Udayasuryan, B.; Sanders, B.E.; Umaña, A.; Zhang, Y.; Peng, H.; Duncan, A.J.; Wang, Y.; Li, L.; et al.
      Fusobacterium nucleatum host-cell binding and invasion induces IL-8 and CXCL1 secretion that drives colorectal cancer cell
      migration. Sci. Signal. 2020, 13, 641. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.   Horiuchi, A.; Kokubu, E.; Warita, T.; Ishihara, K. Synergistic biofilm formation by Parvimonas micra and Fusobacterium nucleatum.
      Anaerobe 2020, 62, 102100. [CrossRef]
38.   Yu, J.; Zhao, L.; Zhao, R.; Long, X.; Coker, O.O.; Sung, J.J. The role of Parvimonas micra in intestinal tumorigenesis in germ-free
      and conventional APCmin/+ mice. J. Clin. Oncol. 2019, 37, 531. [CrossRef]
39.   Taylor, J.C.; Gao, X.; Xu, J.; Holder, M.; Petrosino, J.; Kumar, R.; Liu, W.; Höök, M.; MacKenzie, C.; Hillhouse, A.; et al. A type
      VII secretion system of Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus contributes to gut colonization and the development of colon
      tumors. PLoS Pathog. 2020, 17, e1009182.
40.   Aymeric, L.; Donnadieu, F.; Mulet, C.; du Merle, L.; Nigro, G.; Saffarian, A.; Bérard, M.; Poyart, C.; Robine, S.; Regnault, B.; et al.
      Colorectal cancer specific conditions promote Streptococcus gallolyticus gut colonization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2018,
      115, E283–E291. [CrossRef]
41.   Moosavi, S.M.; Sepahi, A.A.; Mousavi, S.F.; Vaziri, F.; Siadat, S.D. The effect of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and its extracellular
      vesicles on the permeability of intestinal epithelial cells and expression of PPARs and ANGPTL4 in the Caco-2 cell culture model.
      J. Diabetes Metab. Disord. 2020, 19, 1061–1069. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.   Kaakoush, N.O. Sutterella Species, IgA-degrading Bacteria in Ulcerative Colitis. Trends Microbiol. 2020, 28, 519–522. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
43.   Borrellio, S.P. The Normal Flora of the Gastrointestinal Tract; Kamm, M.A., Ed.; Martin Dunitz: London, UK, 2002; pp. 1–12.
44.   Kolenbrander, P.E.; Palmer, R.J.; Periasamy, S.; Jakubovics, N. Oral multispecies biofilm development and the key role of cell-cell
      distance. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2010, 8, 471–480. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.   Wu, C.; Al Mamun, A.A.M.; Luong, T.T.; Hu, B.; Gu, J.; Lee, J.H.; D’Amore, M.; Das, A.; Ton-That, H. Forward Genetic Dissection
      of Biofilm Development by Fusobacterium nucleatum: Novel Functions of Cell Division Proteins FtsX and EnvC. mBio 2018,
      9, e00360-18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.   Abed, J.; Maalouf, N.; Manson, A.L.; Earl, A.M.; Parhi, L.; Emgård, J.E.M.; Klutstein, M.; Tayeb, S.; Almogy, G.; Atlan, K.A.; et al.
      Colon cancer-associated Fusobacterium nucleatum may originate from the oral cavity and reach colon tumors via the circulatory
      system. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2020, 10, 400. [CrossRef]
47.   Suzuki, H.; Matsuo, K.; Okamoto, M.; Nakata, H.; Sakamoto, H.; Fujita, M. Perioperative changes in oral bacteria number in
      patients undergoing cardiac valve surgery. J. Oral Sci. 2019, 61, 526–528. [CrossRef]
48.   Kawano, T.; Shigeishi, H.; Fukada, E.; Yanagisawa, T.; Kuroda, N.; Takemoto, T.; Sugiyama, M. Changes in bacterial number at
      different sites of oral cavity during perioperative oral care management in gastrointestinal cancer patients: Preliminary study.
      J. Appl. Oral Sci. 2018, 26, e20170516. [CrossRef]
