               International Journal of
               Molecular Sciences


Article
16S rRNA of Mucosal Colon Microbiome and CCL2 Circulating
Levels Are Potential Biomarkers in Colorectal Cancer
Carmela Nardelli 1,2,3,† , Ilaria Granata 4,† , Marcella Nunziato 1,2 , Mario Setaro 2 , Fortunata Carbone 5,6 ,
Claudio Zulli 7 , Vincenzo Pilone 8 , Ettore Domenico Capoluongo 1,2 , Giovanni Domenico De Palma 9 ,
Francesco Corcione 10 , Giuseppe Matarese 1,5 , Francesco Salvatore 1,2 and Lucia Sacchetti 2,3, *

                                           1    Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University of Naples Federico II,
                                                80131 Naples, Italy; carmela.nardelli@unina.it (C.N.); nunziato@ceinge.unina.it (M.N.);
                                                capoluongo@ceinge.unina.it (E.D.C.); giuseppe.matarese@unina.it (G.M.); salvator@unina.it (F.S.)
                                           2    CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate S.C.a R.L., 80131 Naples, Italy; setaro@ceinge.unina.it
                                           3    Task Force on Microbiome Studies, University of Naples Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy
                                           4    Institute for High Performance Computing and Networking (ICAR), National Research Council (CNR),
                                                80131 Naples, Italy; ilaria.granata@icar.cnr.it
                                           5    Laboratory of Immunology, Institute of Endocrinology and Experimental Oncology, Consiglio Nazionale
                                                Delle Ricerche (IEOS-CNR), 80131 Naples, Italy; f.carbone@ieos.cnr.it
                                           6    Neuroimmunology Unit, IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, 00143 Roma, Italy
                                           7    Digestive Endoscopy Unit, Gaetano Fucito Hospital, Mercato San Severino, 84085 Salerno, Italy;
                                                claudio.zulli@sangiovannieruggi.it
                                           8    Department of Medicine and Surgery, AOU San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi D’Aragona, University of Salerno,
                                      84084 Salerno, Italy; vpilone@unisa.it
                                    9    Department Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University of Naples, Via Pansini 5,
                                                80131 Naples, Italy; giovanni.depalma@unina.it
Citation: Nardelli, C.; Granata, I.;       10   Department of Public Health, School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples Federico II, Via Pansini 5,
Nunziato, M.; Setaro, M.; Carbone, F.;
                                                80131 Naples, Italy; francesco.corcione@unina.it
Zulli, C.; Pilone, V.; Capoluongo, E.D.;
                                           *    Correspondence: sacchett@unina.it
De Palma, G.D.; Corcione, F.; et al.       †    Co-first authors.
16S rRNA of Mucosal Colon
Microbiome and CCL2 Circulating
                                           Abstract: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common malignancies in the Western world and
Levels Are Potential Biomarkers in
                                           intestinal dysbiosis might contribute to its pathogenesis. The mucosal colon microbiome and C-C
Colorectal Cancer. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
                                           motif chemokine 2 (CCL2) were investigated in 20 healthy controls (HC) and 20 CRC patients using
2021, 22, 10747. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijms221910747
                                           16S rRNA sequencing and immunoluminescent assay, respectively. A total of 10 HC subjects were
                                           classified as overweight/obese (OW/OB_HC) and 10 subjects were normal weight (NW_HC); 15 CRC
Academic Editor: Valerio Fulci             patients were classified as OW/OB_CRC and 5 patients were NW_CRC. Results: Fusobacterium
                                           nucleatum and Escherichia coli were more abundant in OW/OB_HC than in NW_HC microbiomes.
Received: 5 August 2021                    Globally, Streptococcus intermedius, Gemella haemolysans, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Bacteroides fragilis
Accepted: 30 September 2021                and Escherichia coli were significantly increased in CRC patient tumor/lesioned tissue (CRC_LT)
Published: 4 October 2021                  and CRC patient unlesioned tissue (CRC_ULT) microbiomes compared to HC microbiomes. CCL2
                                           circulating levels were associated with tumor presence and with the abundance of Fusobacterium
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral       nucleatum, Bacteroides fragilis and Gemella haemolysans. Our data suggest that mucosal colon dysbiosis
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                           might contribute to CRC pathogenesis by inducing inflammation. Notably, Fusobacterium nucleatum,
published maps and institutional affil-
                                           which was more abundant in the OW/OB_HC than in the NW_HC microbiomes, might represent a
iations.
                                           putative link between obesity and increased CRC risk.

                                           Keywords: CCL2 [chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2]; mucosal colon microbiome; 16S rRNA gene;
                                           obesity; colorectal cancer
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
                                           1. Introduction
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://          Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common malignancies in the Western
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/           world [1]. Accordingly, in Italy, CRC is the second/third most frequent neoplasia in males
4.0/).                                     and in females, respectively, and among the most common causes of cancer death [2].



Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms221910747                                             https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                           2 of 19




                                    Up to now, various genomic subtypes of CRC have been identified that vary by side (as-
                                    cending/right, descending/left, etc.) intestinal tract, and show different histology and
                                    outcomes [3]. Several risk factors for CRC have been, until now, described including
                                    diet, smoking, alcohol, aging, obesity and, recently, intestinal microbiota has also been
                                    implicated in its insurgence and/or in the response to therapy [4–7]. The gut is popu-
                                    lated by trillions of microbial cells (mainly bacteria but also archaea, fungi, protozoa and
                                    viruses) that, by symbiotic interaction with their host, play important roles in human health,
                                    contributing to nutrient absorption, immune response, metabolism and to maintaining
                                    the integrity of the intestinal barrier [8]. Alterations in the gut microbiota and in their
                                    metabolic products might induce dysfunctions in the gut epithelial barrier, thereby leading
                                    to aberrant immune activation and to local and systemic inflammation [9]. It is worth
                                    remembering that inflammation is one of the initiating processes of carcinogenesis, and
                                    that the chemokines that guide the immune cells to the tumor site have been associated
                                    with increased tumor growth and progression [10]. Among cytokines, chemokine (C-C
                                    motif) ligand 2 (CCL2), also named monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP1), is pro-
                                    duced by tumor cells and by various other cells in the host microenvironment, including
                                    adipocytes, and was reported upregulated in various tumors, including CRC, and in obe-
                                    sity [11,12]. This chemokine has been previously involved in tumor promotion under
                                    obese condition [13] and elevated circulating CCL2 levels have been associated with bone
                                    metastasis in prostate cancer patients [14]. Consequently, we specifically chose to measure
                                    the levels of CCL2 to investigate its putative role as a diagnostic biomarker linking inflam-
                                    mation/obesity to CRC. As mentioned before, gut dysbiosis has been described in several
                                    conditions such as metabolic, autoimmune, inflammatory bowel diseases and obesity, and
                                    in different tumors, including CRC [6,15,16]. Microbes play important roles in obesity.
                                    Previously, our group investigated the duodenal metatranscriptome in human obese and
                                    lean subjects, highlighting an obese-associated gut dysbiosis and human and bacterial
                                    genes both contributing to relevant dysfunctions in important metabolic pathways [17,18].
                                    Regarding CRC alterations until now reported in the gut microbiota community or in single
                                    bacterial species in association with the tumor [19], in presence/absence of various risk
                                    factors among which increased adiposity, they have been mostly studied in murine models
                                    and/or in human fecal samples, but the human mucosal colon microbiome has still scarcely
                                    been investigated [20–23]. In this study we: (a) typed the mucosal colon microbiome in
                                    CRC patient tumor lesioned tissue (CRC_LT) and CRC unlesioned tissue (CRC_ULT) from
                                    surgical resection in lean and overweight/obese CRC patients by 16S rRNA sequencing;
                                    (b) compared the CRC-associated microbiomes with those found in mucosal biopsies (from
                                    colonoscopy) of healthy lean and overweight/obese subjects; and (c) measured the CCL2
                                    blood levels, as a biomarker of immune inflammation in both healthy and CRC subjects.
                                          Our aims were: (a) to investigate the differences in the mucosal colon microbiome
                                    between healthy and CRC subjects, with and without the additional contribution of the
                                    overweight/obesity co-morbidity; (b) to explore if tumor-associated microorganisms are
                                    also present in the nearby non-cancerous region; and (c) to look for any association be-
                                    tween significantly CRC-associated bacteria and the systemic inflammation, as assessed
                                    by CCL2 circulating levels. Our data in providing further insight into the CRC-associated
                                    microbiome alterations might hopefully contribute to future potential microbiome- and/or
                                    cytokine-based diagnostic tools in the CRC management.

                                    2. Results
                                    2.1. Mucosal Colon 16S rRNA Analysis
                                         In the present study we analyzed the microbial composition of the mucosal colon
                                    from healthy individuals (HC) and from CRC patients. First, we analyzed the microbial
                                    composition in HC. In Supplementary Figure S1A,B the alpha diversity measured by Shan-
                                    non diversity and Chao1 richness indices is shown. No statistically significant difference in
                                    species richness (number of species) was detected in normal weight HC (NW_HC) micro-
                                    biomes compared to overweight/obese HC (OW/OB_HC) microbiomes: NW is defined
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                                3 of 19




                                    as BMI < 25 kg/m2 and OW/OB is defined as BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2 . No statistically signifi-
                                    cant difference in species richness was detected in the microbiomes of females compared
                                    to males.
                                         The composition of the difference microbial groups (beta-diversity analysis) was
                                    evaluated by PERMANOVA (Adonis), ANOSIM and PERMDISP2 (beta-dispersion) tests.
                                    Representation of sample distances through Nonmetric Multidimensional Scaling (NMDS)
                                    and the results of the associated statistical tests are shown in Figure 1A,B. The Adonis
                                    and ANOSIM tests indicate that the microbiomes of NW_HC and OW/OB_HC were
                                    significantly different (Adonis p-value = 0.003; ANOSIM p-value = 0.005), whereas no
                                    significant difference was found using the beta-dispersion test. No significant difference
                                    was found by any of the tests when grouping the samples by gender. Taken together, these
                                    analyses indicate that there is a significant difference in the compositions of microbial
                                    groups between NW_HC and OW/OB_HC, but not between females and males.




                                    Figure 1. Nonmetric Multidimensional Scaling (NMDS) plots of weighted UniFrac distance to mea-
                                    sure the beta diversity between (A) normal weight (NW) and overweight/obese (OW/OB), and
                                    (B) female and male healthy controls. The taxa counts table has been filtered keeping counts >1 in
                                    at least 10% of samples (383 taxa left) and then normalized through regularized logarithm transfor-
                                    mation (DESeq2 package). Results of PERMANOVA (Adonis) test are shown in both panels. The
                                    significance in case of NW and OW/OB diversity (p-value = 0.003), indicates a separation between
                                    the centroids of the two groups. In addition, the values obtained through the Analysis of Similarity
                                    (ANOSIM) and beta-dispersion tests are shown. No significance is instead present grouping samples
                                    between females and males.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                             4 of 19




                                         Four dominant phyla characterized the mucosal colon microbiome of our healthy
                                    control cohort, Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria, in decreasing
                                    relative abundances (Supplementary Figure S2). Differential abundance analysis high-
                                    lighted the different taxa that were significantly different (adjusted p-value < 0.05) between
                                    the OW/OB_HC and NW_HC samples from phylum to species level (Table 1: note that
                                    taxa that were not significantly different between the OW/OB_HC and NW_HC samples
                                    are not listed).

                                    Table 1. Differentially abundant taxa (6 taxonomic ranks) between OW/OB and NW healthy control
                                    samples with the associated Log2FC values and adjusted p-values.

                                        Level                           Taxa                       Log2FC      Adjusted p-Value
                                                                     Firmicutes                     −1.25            0.0072
                                       Phylum                       Fusobacteria                     2.3             0.0282
                                                                   Proteobacteria                   1.57             0.0134
                                                              Clostridia (Firmicutes)               −2.15            0.0009
                                                          Coriobacteriia (Actinobacteria)           −2.52            0.0250
                                        Class
                                                           Fusobacteriia (Fusobacteria)             2.11             0.0444
                                                       Gammaproteobacteria (Proteobacteria)         1.84             0.0143
                                                          Bifidobacteriales (Actinobacteria)        −3.8             0.0002
                                        Order                 Clostridiales (Firmicutes)            −3.29            0.0001
                                                          Coriobacteriales (Actinobacteria)         −4.06            0.0002
                                                         Bifidobacteriaceae (Actinobacteria)        −3.53            0.0030
                                        Family           Coriobacteriaceae (Actinobacteria)         −3.22            0.0051
                                                           Ruminococcaceae (Firmicutes)             −3.22            0.0030
                                                           Acinetobacter (Proteobacteria)           3.14             0.0138
                                                            Collinsella (Actinobacteria)            −3.3             0.0210
                                                           Fusobacterium (Fusobacteria)             2.79             0.0418
                                        Genus              Haemophilus (Proteobacteria)             2.55             0.0210
                                                           Peptoclostridium (Firmicutes)            −4.03            0.0138
                                                            Ruminococcus (Firmicutes)               −4.2             0.0002
                                                           Subdoligranulum (Firmicutes)             −6.31            0.0000
                                                        Acinetobacter lwoffii (Proteobacteria)      4.17             0.0062
                                                          Bacteroides dorei (Bacteroidetes)         −5.88            0.0002
                                                        Bifidobacterium longum (Firmicutes)         −3.91            0.0051
                                                          Escherichia coli (Proteobacteria)         2.62             0.0089
                                        Species       Fusobacterium nucleatum (Fusobacteria)        3.26             0.0176
                                                     Haemophilus parainfluenzae (Proteobacteria)    2.07             0.0487
                                                        Peptoclostridium difficile (Firmicutes)     −3.26            0.0454
                                                         Ruminococcus torques (Firmicutes)          −3.22            0.0089
                                                       Subdoligranulum variabile (Firmicutes)       −4.67            0.0002


                                          In detail, Fusobacteria and Proteobacteria phyla were more abundant, Firmicutes
                                    was less abundant phyla in OW/OB_HC than in NW_HC, whereas Bacteroidetes and
                                    Actinobacteria showed similar abundances in both groups (Figures 2A and S2).
                                          At species level, Acinetobacter lwoffii, Escherichia coli and Haemophilus parainfluenzae
                                    (Proteobacteria), Fusobacterium nucleatum (Fusobacteria), resulted more abundant, and
                                    Bacteroides dorei (Bacteroidetes), Subdoligranulum variabile, Bifidobacterium longum, Pepto-
                                    clostridium difficile and Ruminococcus torques (Firmicutes) less abundant in OW/OB_HC
                                    than in NW_HC (Table 1).
                                          Secondly, we analyzed the differences in colon microbiome of CRC patients, in par-
                                    ticular comparing the tumor lesioned (CRC_LT) to the unlesioned (CRC_ULT) tissues. In
                                    Supplementary Figure S3 the alpha diversity measured by Shannon index is shown, con-
                                    sidering (A): CRC_LT and CRC_ULT samples divided by overweight/obesity comorbidity;
                                    (B) CRC_LT and CRC_ULT samples grouped by the different tumor location (ascending
                                    colon AC, rectum R and sigma-descending colon S_DC); (C) the samples grouped for tumor
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                                    5 of 19




                                    stages (AJCC staging) and divided by the location. Only in the sigma-descending colon
                                    tract statistically significant differences in microbial richness and diversity were detected
                                    comparing I_II vs. III_IV tumor stages (*** p < 0.005). Furthermore, the PCoA of weighted
                                    UniFrac distance showed that the distributions of microbiomes in CRC patients were
                                    significantly separated on the basis of tumor location and stage (PERMANOVA (Adonis)
                                    test p < 0.05) (Figure 3). In fact, the test highlights that the centroids of each group are
                                    significantly different from each other (p < 0.05).




                                    Figure 2. Boxplots of the significant results (adjusted p-value < 0.05) obtained through differential
                                    abundance test between OW/OB and NW healthy groups at (A) phylum and (B) genus levels. The
                                    test has been performed by applying DESeq2 Negative Binomial distribution. The taxa have been
                                    grouped by taxonomy level and those having counts >1 in at least 60% of samples have been kept.
                                    Lower and upper box boundaries 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively, line inside box median,
                                    lower and upper error lines 10th and 90th percentiles, respectively, filled circles data falling outside
                                    10th and 90th percentiles.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                                6 of 19




                                    Figure 3. Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) plots of weighted UniFrac distance showing the
                                    distribution of CRC patients: (A) colored by weight and lesion and shaped by tumor location and
                                    (B) colored by tumor stage and shaped by tumor location. The taxa counts table has been filtered
                                    keeping counts >1 in at least 10% of samples (508 taxa left) and then normalized through regularized
                                    logarithm transformation (DESeq2 package). The table shows the grouping factors for which PER-
                                    MANOVA test (ADONIS) gave a p-value < 0.05 indicating a separation: tumor location and stage.
                                    Values obtained from Analysis of Similarity (ANOSIM) and beta-dispersion tests are also shown. AC,
                                    ascending colon; S_DC, sigma-descending colon; R, rectum. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.001.

                                         Comparison of bacterial species differently present in the several colon tracts are
                                    detailed in Supplementary Table S2.
                                         Akkermansia muciniphila, Granulicatella adiacens, Streptococcus intermedius and Gemella
                                    haemolysans were significantly more abundant, whereas Alistipes spp, Bacteroides spp. and
                                    Parabacteroides distasonis were significantly less abundant in the sigma-descending colon
                                    than in ascending colon. Fusobacterium nucleatum and Bacteroides fragilis were both more
                                    present in sigma-descending colon and ascending colon than in rectum. Regarding the
                                    comparison of microbiomes in CRC_LT versus CRC_ULT samples, Fusobacterium nuclea-
                                    tum and Bacteroides fragilis were significantly more abundant in CRC_NW_LT than in
                                    CRC_NW_ULT (8.82 and 5.58 Log2FC, respectively) (Figure 4). Further, slight increased
                                    abundances of these two bacteria, even if not at significant level, were observed comparing
                                    CRC_OW/OB_ LT with CRC_OW/OB_ ULT samples (Figure 4).
                                         Finally, we compared the microbiomes of CRC patients with HC subjects. The PCoA
                                    of weighted UniFrac distance showed a significant separation between the two groups
                                    (PERMANOVA (Adonis) test, p = 0.001) (Figure 5A,B). The significant beta-dispersion
                                    (p = 0.022) indicated that two groups were not homogenously dispersed. Separation re-
                                    sulted significant at ANOSIM test (p = 0.001) when we compared CRC_ULT/CRC_LT
                                    vs. HC.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                                7 of 19




                                    Figure 4. Dot plots of log transformed and DESeq2 normalized counts of B. fragilis and F. nucleatum
                                    in CRC samples grouped by weight and lesion. The red dots indicate the mean. The associated table
                                    shows the Log2FC and adjusted p-value of these two bacteria obtained by the comparison NW_LT
                                    vs. NW_ULT.

                                         The differentially abundant species between CRC and HC, resulting from multiple
                                    comparisons, are reported in Table 2. The most abundant species in CRC vs. HC as well
                                    as in CRC_LT vs. HC were: Streptococcus intermedius (Firmicutes), Gemella haemolysans
                                    (Firmicutes), Fusobacterium nucleatum (Fusobacteria), Bacteroides fragilis (Bacteroidetes) and
                                    Escherichia coli (Proteobacteria). Interestingly, these bacteria were also more abundant in
                                    CRC_ULT vs. HC, except the Bacteroides fragilis, suggesting a microbial profile significantly
                                    associated with CRC both in tumor lesioned and unlesioned tissues. Ruminococcus torques,
                                    previously found significantly less abundant in OW/OB_HC than in NW_HC, was also less
                                    abundant in CRC vs. HC and in CRC_ULT vs. HC (Table 2). In Supplementary Figure S4,
                                    the boxplots showing the comparisons between CRC and HC for the several significant
                                    bacterial species are reported.

                                    2.2. Impact of Aging on Microbiome Composition
                                          To exclude that the CRC associated microbiome profile could be influenced by the
                                    different age range of our HC and CRC subjects, we used the median age (64 years) of
                                    our entire cohort of 40 samples as cutoff to categorize the individuals as adult (≤64 years)
                                    or old (>64 years). The alpha diversity measured by Shannon index (Supplementary
                                    Figure S5, panel A) showed no significant difference in the abundance and evenness of
                                    the species present within the microbial community of the two differently aged groups,
                                    whereas the number of taxa (species richness) measured by Chao index (Supplementary
                                    Figure S5, panel B) was not statistically significant within HC and within CRC ≤ or
                                    >64 years, but significantly higher in CRC compared to HC in both groups of different ages.
                                    The beta-diversity analysis is shown in Supplementary Figure S6 and highlighted that
                                    the centroids of each group were significantly different from each other (PERMANOVA
                                    (Adonis) p-adjusted = 0.003). In Supplementary Figure S7, the box plots of microbial pro-
                                    files in the two groups of HC and CRC subjects (Log normalized counts) obtained at
                                    phylum and species levels (panel A and B, respectively) are reported. The counts were
                                    modeled considering the age categorization as a covariate before performing the differential
                                    abundance test using the DeSeq2 package. The latter test highlighted that Actinobacteria
                                    and Fusobacteria phyla (adjusted p-value < 0.001) and the species Streptococcus intermedius,
                                    Gemella haemolysans, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Escherichia coli (adjusted p-value < 0.001)
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                              8 of 19




                                    were significantly different between CRC and HC, independently from the age differences
                                    between the two groups.




      Figure 5. Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) plots of weighted UniFrac distance showing the distribution of CRC patients
      and healthy controls. In (A), the samples are differently colored according to tumoral (CRC) or healthy (healthy controls)
      condition and the shapes indicate overweight/obesity comorbidity. In (B), the CRC samples are further differently colored
      according to tumor lesioned (LT) or unlesioned tissue (ULT). The taxa counts table has been filtered keeping counts >1
      in at least 10% of samples (325 taxa left) and then normalized through regularized logarithm transformation (DESeq2
      package). CRC patients and healthy controls are well separated, as also demonstrated by the significance obtained applying
      PERMANOVA (Adonis) test (p = 0.001). Values obtained from Analysis of Similarity (ANOSIM) and beta-dispersion tests
      are also shown.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                                    9 of 19




                                    2.3. Association between CCL2 Blood Levels in CRC Patients and Healthy Controls and the
                                    Abundances of Bacteria Significantly CRC-Associated
                                          We found significantly higher mean blood levels of CCL2 in CRC than in HC sam-
                                    ples (102 vs. 38 pg/mL, p = 0.009). In order to verify the association between CCL2
                                    blood levels and the abundance of bacteria found significantly associated with CRC, we
                                    performed linear multiple regression analysis building a model for each of the selected
                                    bacteria including the category variable of the tumor presence. The multiple tests allow
                                    to consider in the same model the association of the two variables (bacterium abundance
                                    and presence of tumor) to the CCL2 levels. First, we checked that regardless of the age
                                    of the study groups, CCL2 plasma levels were significantly associated with tumor pres-
                                    ence (p = 0.00343) (Figure 6A–C). Among the bacteria resulting significantly associated
                                    with the tumor (more than two folds increased abundance with respect to HC) in our
                                    study, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Bacteroides fragilis and Gemella haemolysans were found to be
                                    significantly associated with CCL2 blood levels (p = 0.030, 0.050 and 0.001, respectively)
                                    (Figure 6A–C), while Streptococcus intermedius was not associated. When the p-values are
                                    significant, we can reject the null hypothesis and conclude that F. Nucleatum or B. fragilis
                                    abundance, together with the presence of tumor, likely influence rates of CCL2. In the case
                                    of the model built with the G. Haemolysan abundance and tumor presence variables, it tells
                                    that the estimated increase in CCL2 associated to G. haemolysans is higher than to the other
                                    bacteria and, contrary to F. Nucleatum and B. fragilis, the increase in CCL2 levels is totally
                                    influenced and explained by the increase in bacterium abundance, as their association is
                                    stronger, making the presence of tumor irrelevant.

      Table 2. Differentially abundant species in multiple comparisons performed analyzing CRC patients and healthy controls
      (HC) together, with the associated Log2FC values and adjusted p-values.

                                                                                                                        Adjusted
                                                                 Species                          Log2FC
                                                                                                                        p-Value
                                                 Streptococcus intermedius (Firmicutes)             5.72                9 × 10−9
                                                   Gemella haemolysans (Firmicutes)                  5.4               1.15 × 10−8
                                                   Ruminococcus torques (Firmicutes)                −3                 9.91 × 10−5
          CRC vs. Healthy Controls              Fusobacterium nucleatum (Fusobacteria)              3.88               5.65 × 10−4
                                                    Escherichia coli (Proteobacteria)               1.85               5.65 × 10−4
                                                   Bacteroides fragilis (Bacteroidetes)             2.44               1.43 × 10−2
                                               Haemophilus parainfluenzae (Proteobacteria)          2.11               4.60 × 10−2
                                                         Gemella haemolysans                       4.84                3.76 × 10−5
                                                       Streptococcus intermedius                   4.72                5.52 × 10−5
                                                         Ruminococcus torques                      −3.21               3.24 × 10−3
       CRC_ULT vs. Healthy Controls
                                                            Escherichia coli                       1.84                5.08 × 10−3
                                                       Fusobacterium nucleatum                      3.4                2.31 × 10−2
                                                    Ruminococcus gnavus (Firmicutes)               2.03                4.85 × 10−2
                                                        Streptococcus intermedius                  7.06               2.65 × 10−10
                                                        Fusobacterium nucleatum                    7.33               5.33 × 10−8
                                                           Gemella haemolysans                     5.85               6.43 × 10−8
        CRC_LT vs. Healthy Controls                         Bacteroides fragilis                   4.18               7.34 × 10−4
                                                       Haemophilus parainfluenzae                  −3.44              2.96 × 10−3
                                                              Escherichia coli                     1.85               3.23 × 10−3
                                                   Bacteroides vulgatus (Bacteroidetes)            −2.03              4.52 × 10−2
                                                            Escherichia coli                       3.36                4.48 × 10−3
         NW_ULT_CRC vs. NW_HC                             Ruminococcus torques                     −5.18               4.48 × 10−3
                                                          Gemella haemolysans                      4.63                4.74 × 10−2
                                                        Streptococcus intermedius                   7.72               1.78 × 10−5
    OW/OB_ULT_CRC vs. OW/OB_HC
                                                          Gemella haemolysans                       4.45               5.68 × 10−3
      CRC = CRC_LT + CRC_ULT samples; CRC_LT = CRC patient tumor lesioned tissue; CRC_ULT = CRC patient unlesioned tissue, i.e., CRC
      adjacent normal tissue; HC = healthy controls.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                                        10 of 19




      Figure 6. (A) Scatterplot matrix for circulating CCL2 levels (pg/mL), age (years), F. nucleatum abundance (log2 transformed
      and normalized), B. fragilis abundance (log2 transformed and normalized), G. haemolysans abundance (log2 transformed
      and normalized), S. intermedius abundance (log2 transformed and normalized) variables, showing within tumor presence
      groups (yes = CRC patients; no = healthy controls) 50 and 95% concentration ellipses. Inside the diagonal boxes the
      distribution curves are shown. (B) Boxplots for circulating CCL2 levels (pg/mL), age (years), F. nucleatum abundance (log2
      transformed and normalized), B. fragilis abundance (log2 transformed and normalized), G. haemolysans abundance (log2
      transformed and normalized), S. intermedius abundance (log2 transformed and normalized) variables in samples classified
      by tumor presence (yes = CRC patients; no = healthy controls). (C) Final model tables from multiple linear regression
      analysis in relation to the circulating CCL2 levels. Intercept = the mean for the response when all of the explanatory
      variables take on the value 0. Estimate = the estimated effect (also called the regression coefficient or r2 value), tells us that
      for every unit increase in microbial abundance there is an associated increase in CCL2 levels (the amount is given by the
      estimate corresponding to the bacterium), and that in case of CRC disease there is an associated increase in CCL2 levels.
      Std.error = standard error of the estimate. This number shows how much variation there is around the estimates of the
      regression coefficient. t value = statistic test. The statistic test used in linear regression is the t-value from a two-sided t-test.
      The larger the statistic test, the less likely it is that the results occurred by chance. Pr(>|t|) = p-value. This shows how likely
      the calculated t-value would have occurred by chance if the null hypothesis of no effect of the parameter were true.

                                    3. Discussion
                                         In the last years, it has been suggested that gut dysbiosis could be involved in the
                                    onset of obesity but also of other metabolic diseases and gastrointestinal cancers, includ-
                                    ing CRC [15]. The hypothesized biologic mechanism linking excess body fat to cancer
                                    risk is that adipocytes secrete an array of bioactive signaling molecules including pro-
                                    inflammatory adipokines and cytokines that, by inducing chronic low-grade inflammation,
                                    may stimulate cancer development [24]. To support the association between obesity and
                                    colorectal cancer risk, the observational epidemiologic evidence indicates the 10–30%
                                    magnitude of relative risk increases for BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2 versus BMI < 25 kg/m2 [25].
                                         Here, we first investigated the mucosal colon microbiome in two groups of healthy
                                    subjects and CRC patients divided by weight in NW and OW/OB according to their
                                    BMI< or ≥25 kg/m2 , respectively, to highlight if there were obese-associated bacterial
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                           11 of 19




                                    alterations, possibly in common between HC and CRC, that might likely address the
                                    increased risk of cancer development in obesity. Second, we explored if CRC-associated
                                    bacterial abundances differed between cancerous and non-cancerous tissue in the same
                                    patient. Finally, we evaluated if the bacterial alterations found in CRC patients correlated
                                    with systemic inflammation, as evaluated by the circulating levels of the CCL2 cytokine
                                    marker previously found increased in several cancers and in obesity [11,12].

                                    3.1. Mucosal Colon Microbiome Was Different between NW and OW/OB Control Subjects
                                          In the mucosal microbiome of our HC subjects, we found significantly reduced abun-
                                    dance of Bacteroides dorei (Bacteroidetes), Bifidobacterium longum (Actinobacteria), Pepto-
                                    clostridium difficile, Subligranulum variabile and Ruminococcus torques (Firmicutes) species in
                                    OW/OB_HC with respect to NW_HC. Interestingly, we also found increased abundances
                                    in OW/OB_HC with respect to NW_HC of Fusobacterium nucleatum (Fusobacteria) and
                                    Escherichia coli (Proteobacteria); both species, often described in CRC-microbiomes and
                                    known to produce metabolites, able to drive inflammation and alterations of the intestinal
                                    barrier function [19,26]. Fusobacterium nucleatum has also been previously reported to be
                                    more abundant in obese than in lean Japanese subjects [27]. Globally, contrasting data are
                                    reported in literature regarding the obesity-associated dysbiosis, independent of the dif-
                                    ferent studies and the several factors influencing the gut microbiome (i.e., animal/human
                                    study models, geographical area of the studied cohorts, dietary habits or treatments, stud-
                                    ied samples (i.e., faeces, colonic mucosal biopsies or other intestinal tracts) and analytical
                                    methods used to study microbiome) [23,28]. Usually, but not always, increased relative
                                    abundance of Firmicutes and reduced relative abundance of Bacteroidetes were found in
                                    the obese-associated microbiomes [29–32]. However, as a consequence of the accumulation
                                    of data, the ratio Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes relative abundance was no longer confirmed to
                                    be a clear biomarker of obesity susceptibility [33,34]. Moreover, a recent metanalysis using
                                    five publicly available stool and tissue-based 16S rRNA and whole genome sequencing
                                    data set, identified Bacteroides spp. and Bifidobacterium spp. as the species most often able
                                    to differentiate individuals with and without obesity [35]. In accordance with the latter
                                    report, we found significantly reduced abundances of Bacteroides spp. and Bifidobacterium
                                    spp. in our OW/OB_HC with respect to NW_HC. Interestingly, depletion of short chain
                                    fatty acids (SCFA)-producing bacteria such as Bifidobacterium longum has been reported to
                                    promote colorectal carcinogenesis in obese patients [36].

                                    3.2. Differences in Mucosal Colon Microbiome between Tumor Lesioned and Unlesioned Tissues of
                                    CRC Patients
                                          In our CRC patients divided by weight, we detected significant increased relative
                                    abundances of Fusobacterium nucleatum and Bacteroides fragilis in colon microbiome from
                                    LT_NW with respect to ULT_NW and no significantly different taxa between LT_OW/OB
                                    and ULT_OW/OB. However, in CRC OW/OB tissues, Fusobacterium nucleatum and Bac-
                                    teroides fragilis showed comparable abundances to those found in LT_NW. The latter finding
                                    suggests two observations: First, that contrary to what happens in CRC-NW patients, in
                                    the presence of overweight/obesity as co-morbidity, the CRC-associated bacterial alter-
                                    ations are not restricted to the lesioned area, in agreement with recent literature data [21];
                                    second, that the increased Fusobacterium nucleatum abundance detected in OW/OB_HC
                                    with respect to NW_HC subjects, might play a weak effect on mediating CRC risk. Con-
                                    sistently, recent data reported that in individuals with obesity, Fusobacterium nucleatum
                                    showed strong prediction (log2 OR) of CRC [35]. Moreover, Bacteroides fragilis was the only
                                    species in intestinal microbiomes reported as being consistently enriched in a metanalysis
                                    of metagenomes of CRC patients worldwide [37]. Anyway, we are aware that the number
                                    of our samples is limited so our results have to be taken as an indication and need further
                                    experimental validation.
                                          PCoA revealed differences in CRC mucosal colon microbiome depending on the
                                    intestinal tumor location and on the tumor stage. In particular, Fusobacterium nucleatum
                                    and Bacteroides fragilis were less abundant and Bifibacterium longum was more abundant in
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                           12 of 19




                                    rectal than in sigma-descending colon and ascending colon tumors, but the abundances of
                                    these two bacteria did not differ between sigma-descending colon and ascending colon
                                    tumor locations. Akkermansia muciniphila was highly significantly abundant in CRC patients
                                    with rectal and sigma-descending tumors, whereas Gemella haemolysans and Streptococcus
                                    intermedius abounded, and Alistipes spp. were reduced in sigma-descending colon with
                                    respect to rectum and ascending colon. In this regard, we would underline that although
                                    Akkermansia muciniphila is considered a protective microbe, high abundance of this bac-
                                    terium was previously described in individuals with rectal and distal colon cancer [38].
                                    Nonetheless, the role of this species needs to be further investigated in terms of any possi-
                                    ble mechanistic effect on the cancer. In agreement to our data, significant differences in
                                    microbial alterations between distal and proximal CRC have been previously described [22].
                                    Although PCoA highlighted in our study differences in microbial patterns depending on
                                    tumor stage, the differently staged tumors were randomly located in the different colon
                                    tracts. Further, it should be remembered that right and left sides of the colon have distinct
                                    embryologic origins and biology, different gene expression profiles and methylation pat-
                                    terns, different tumor suppressors and oncogene mutations that are all biologic distinctions
                                    able in influencing microbial composition, host-microbiome interaction and impacting
                                    tumor prognosis [3]. That said, considering the small CRC cohort here studied and because
                                    we lacked genetic tumor characteristics of our patients, we could not discriminate among
                                    the significant stage-associated microbial changes to those actually correlated to the stage
                                    of the tumor or to other influencing characteristics.

                                    3.3. Mucosal Colon CRC Microbiome Differs Significantly from That of Healthy Controls
                                          Mucosal colon microbiomes resulted significantly different between our CRC patients
                                    and HC subjects. Further, PCoA analysis highlighted that both CRC_ULT and CRC_LT
                                    associated microbiomes were similar to each other and significantly different from the HC
                                    microbiomes. In particular, the CRC-associated microbiome was characterized by increased
                                    abundances of Streptococcus intermedius, Gemella haemolysans, Fusobacterium nucleatum,
                                    Bacteroides fragilis and Escherichia coli. All these bacteria were also more abundant in
                                    CRC_ULT vs. HC, except the Bacteroides fragilis. Our findings support that microbial
                                    change in CRC colon patients occurs as a continuum from the CRC unlesioned (adjacent
                                    normal) tissue to the CRC lesioned tissue. However, these results deserve further validation
                                    in a larger than the present cohort.
                                          So far, several mechanisms by which bacteria can promote an environment that favors
                                    the development of cancer have been described, among which are the generation of toxic
                                    metabolites that may be pro-carcinogenic, DNA damage, induction of cell proliferation,
                                    alteration of the intestinal barrier, post-transcriptional modification via altered microRNA
                                    expression and inflammatory capability [6,26].
                                          In particular, among CRC-associated bacteria in our cohort, the Fusobacterium nuclea-
                                    tum has been frequently found enriched in patients with colorectal cancer [23]. It has been
                                    correlated with DNA methylation of genes within the inflamed colonic mucosa which
                                    enhances tumorigenesis [39,40]. F. nucleatum is also capable of inducing inflammation
                                    and alteration in the intestinal barrier by producing lipopolysaccharide, reactive oxygen
                                    and nitrogen species [41]. Fusobacteria were also used to expand their ecological niches
                                    by entering the cell and inducing proliferation, so promoting colorectal cancer [42,43].
                                    Bacteroides fragilis is a pathogenic bacterium able to colonize the intestinal epithelium with
                                    pro-carcinogenic capabilities and it produces reactive oxygen species that can damage host
                                    DNA so contributing to colon cancer [44]. Further, the enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis,
                                    which produces the Bacteroides fragilis toxin, was found enriched in CRC tissues compared
                                    to tissues from controls or adjacent non-cancerous tissue [45]. B. fragilis toxin activates Wnt
                                    and NF-kβ signaling pathways and increases the release of pro-inflammatory molecules
                                    from epithelial intestinal cells [44]. Accordingly, we found higher B. fragilis abundance
                                    in CRC microbiome than in HC or ULT tissues, although further experiments need to
                                    establish whether the B. fragilis species found in our CRC cohort is the enterotoxic one.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                        13 of 19




                                          Escherichia coli is able to produce toxin as colibactin with oncogenic potential by
                                    causing DNA crosslinks and double strand DNA breaks [46]. Mucosa-associated E. coli
                                    increased abundance has been reported in CRC tissue and correlates with tumor stage and
                                    prognosis [47].
                                          In our CRC associated microbiome, along with Fusobacterium nucleatum, Bacteroides
                                    fragilis and Escherichia coli, we also found as new players Streptococcus spp. and Gemella
                                    spp. These latter bacteria were recently reported in CRC microbiome and hypothesized to
                                    produce oxidative stress and inflammation [48–51].

                                    3.4. Circulating Levels of CCL2 in CRC and Healthy Controls
                                          We found significantly higher circulating levels of CCL2 in CRC patients than in con-
                                    trol subjects. In agreement to our data, several chemokines, among which was CCL2, have
                                    been previously associated with increased tumor growth and progression [11]. Further,
                                    inhibition of CCL2 signaling was shown to reduce cancer cell metastasis in tumor bearing
                                    mice, so CCL2 might be a potential target for the cancer treatment [52]. More elevated
                                    circulating levels of CCL2 were measured in aged mice than in young mice [53] and age-
                                    related changes in the microbiome might potentially contribute to the pro-inflammatory
                                    environment associated with the aging process [54]. In our study, we found that CCL2
                                    circulating levels correlated significantly with the tumor presence and with the abundance
                                    of Fusobacterium nucleatum, Bacteroides fragilis and Gemella haemolysans in the colon of our
                                    CRC patients. Moreover, the CCL2 increase was almost independent from the age of
                                    the CRC patients since we found only slightly increased CCL2 levels in control subjects
                                    with increasing age with respect to those observed in CRC patients at any age. Previ-
                                    ously, increased abundance of F. nucleatum has been associated to a high expression of
                                    pro-inflammatory cytokines in colonic tissue from CRC patients [7]. On the other hand,
                                    Streptococcus intermedius does not appear to be a predictive factor of a CCL2 increase. In
                                    conclusion, based on our data, we hypothesize that the CRC-associated microbiome directly
                                    or by releasing bacteria-derived substances (i.e., LPS, ROS, etc.) might promote intestinal
                                    lumen inflammation and induce the CCL2 transcription by cells in the tumor microen-
                                    vironment. In support of our hypothesis, recent findings link CCL2 to the inflammation
                                    and cancer pathogenesis and provide evidence that CCL2 production in tumors is due
                                    to complex interactions between tumor and non-tumor cells, both cells contributing to
                                    the high tumor-associated CCL2 levels [10,11]. However, we cannot rule out that other
                                    potential confounders covariates could contribute in increasing CCL2 levels in CRC and
                                    further studies should confirm our results.
                                          In this study there are some limitations. The number of the enrolled CRC and control
                                    subjects was relatively small and the mean age of CRC patients, as expected, was higher
                                    than that of healthy controls. Nevertheless, after dividing our cohort in ≤ or >64 years, we
                                    confirmed that the CRC associated microbiome was independent from age of the subjects.
                                    Further, all individuals were from the same geographical area, 50% female, none were
                                    hospitalized prior to surgery and all reported following the Mediterranean diet, likely
                                    thereby reducing some of the major factors affecting the colon microbiome in aged patients.
                                    When cancer patients were divided by tumor location, the number of subjects in each
                                    subgroup is low and the differences observed in microbiome profile/location, even if
                                    comparable between tumor lesioned and un-lesioned tissue in each patient, should be
                                    taken with caution and confirmed in a larger number of patients. Further, the comparison
                                    between increases in CCL2 circulating levels and bacterial species abundances in colon
                                    observed in CRC patients indicates an association but not a causal link among these
                                    variables. For this purpose, additive experiments (i.e., stimulation-like experiments in
                                    cellular models with CRC-associated bacterial species) are necessary to demonstrate the
                                    inflammatory effect of CRC-associated bacteria. Despite this, ours is one of the first human
                                    association studies between the increased CCL2 circulating levels and CRC, previous
                                    studies being mostly performed in murine models.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                         14 of 19




                                         One merit of our study is to have compared the mucosal colon microbiome, not only
                                    in the cancerous and non-cancerous tissues of each patient, but also with a control group
                                    of the same geographical area and to have also taken into consideration the presence of
                                    overweight/obesity as co-morbidity for the onset of cancer.

                                    4. Materials and Methods
                                    4.1. Patients and Controls
                                          We studied two groups of subjects. Study group 1 (n = 20) included healthy controls
                                    (HC) (50% female; mean age = 53.2 years) recruited among those undergoing colonoscopy
                                    as part of their diagnostic path, in whom the histology revealed a normal mucosa or
                                    diverticulitis and the absence of any cancer lesion. Study group 2 (n = 20) included CRC
                                    patients (50% female; mean age = 69.4 years) that were consecutively recruited among
                                    those scheduled for tumor resection.
                                          The study groups were enrolled at the Surgery and Medicine Department of the
                                    “Università degli Studi di Salerno” and at the Surgery and Medicine Department of the
                                    “Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II” between 2019 and 2020. Exclusion criteria for
                                    both groups were inflammatory bowel disease or irritable bowel syndrome and antibiotics,
                                    pro- and pre-biotics, antiviral or corticosteroid treatments in the two months prior the col-
                                    lection of the samples. General characteristics of the CRC group, including tumor location
                                    and stage, and of the control group are reported in Supplementary Table S1. The clinical
                                    and anamnestic data of each subject were collected by an expert clinician. All subjects re-
                                    ported to follow a Mediterranean diet; 20% CRC and 45% HC were smokers. The following
                                    diseases/drugs assumption were reported in the CRC patients: hypertension, (25%)/anti-
                                    hypertensive/diuretics; diabetes, (25%)/metformin; cardiomyopathy, (25%)/cardioaspirin;
                                    neuropathy, (10%)/edoxaban. All the enrolled subjects gave their informed consent to
                                    participate in the study, according to the Helsinki Declaration 2013.
                                          The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the “Università degli Studi
                                    di Napoli Federico II” authorization no. 318/20, 9 September 2020, and the “Univer-
                                    sità degli Studi di Salerno”, authorization n. 50, 15 July 2015; amendment n. 141070,
                                    26 November 2019.

                                    4.2. Sample Collection and Storage
                                         We collected from each enrolled individual a blood sample for biochemical investi-
                                    gations and one or two colon biopsies from HC or CRC patients, respectively. The colon
                                    biopsies were taken during surgery (CRC-ULT and CRC-LT) for study group 1, or during
                                    colonoscopy (HC) for study group 2. Colonoscopy was performed under sterile conditions
                                    to avoid contamination according to quality indicators suggested from Garborg K et al.,
                                    2017 [55]. Biopsies were immediately cooled in dry ice and stored at −80 ◦ C within 15 min
                                    until DNA isolation for the following microbiome analysis. The same standard procedure
                                    was performed in the two clinical centers.

                                    4.3. CCL2 Assay
                                          Circulating CCL2 levels in HC and CRC patients were measured in a fixed volume
                                    of sample (25 µL) by using Human ProcartaPlex Mix & Match 22-plex (Thermo Fisher
                                    Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) kit, according to manufacturer’s instructions. The assay
                                    was run on a Luminex 200 system (Luminex Corporation, Austin, TX, USA). Data were fit
                                    to a nine-point standard curve generated using the five-parameter logistic regression model
                                    with the xPonent 3.1 software. Extrapolated values were used for samples that exhibited
                                    fluorescent signals above background (i.e., above blank samples) but below the standard
                                    curve range. CCL2 levels were represented as mean values and t-test was performed to
                                    compare the CCL2 levels between HC and CRC patients, a p-value < 0.05 was considered
                                    statistically significant.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                         15 of 19




                                    4.4. DNA Isolation and 16S rRNA Sequencing
                                         Each biopsy (~5 mg) was pulverized with a standard liquid nitrogen pre-chilled mor-
                                    tar and pestle. This powder was transferred to a 1.5 mL tube with 1 mL of Phosphate
                                    Buffered Saline (PBS) (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). The homogenate was vortexed
                                    vigorously using Vortex-Genie 2 (Scientific Industries, Bohemia, NY, USA). Subsequently,
                                    microbial DNA was isolated by using QIAamp DNA Microbiome Kit (Qiagen, Venlo,
                                    The Netherlands), according to manufacturer’s instructions. All extractions were per-
                                    formed in a pre-PCR designated room using a biosafety cabinet. The yield and the quality
                                    of extracted microbial DNA were determined using Qubit dsDNA HS (High Sensitivity)
                                    Assay Kit (Invitrogen Co., Life Sciences, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and TapeStation (Agilent
                                    Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), respectively. The amplification of the hypervariable
                                    V3-V4-V6 regions of the bacterial 16S rRNA was performed using the Microbiota solution
                                    B (Arrow Diagnostics, Genova, Italy), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The
                                    quality and quantity of libraries were evaluated by TapeStation system and Qubit dsDNA
                                    HS Assay, respectively, to prepare the equimolar libraries pool. Sequencing was performed
                                    on MiSeq Illumina® sequencing platform (Illumina, CA, USA) using V2 500 cycles reagent.
                                    Possible contaminations during the above procedural steps were verified using a nega-
                                    tive control and the repeatability of the sequencing procedures assessed using a standard
                                    control (Gut Microbiome genomic Mix-ATCC MSA-1006, LGC Standard, Milan, Italy)
                                    processed simultaneously to the patients’ samples.

                                    4.5. Reads Processing
                                          The raw paired ends FASTQ files of 60 samples, 6 negative controls and 6 standards
                                    obtained from 6 sequencing runs (ranging from 14,355 to 150,520 reads) were quality filtered
                                    and trimmed (5858–101,620 reads left) by filterAndTrim function of DADA2 R package v.
                                    1.12.1 [56]. Given the length of the V3-V6 amplicon (721 bp) and the reads length (2 × 250),
                                    the paired mates did not overlap. In these cases, it is often advised to use only first reads
                                    for taxonomy annotation, thus losing information from the second reads. A recent strategy,
                                    called JTax, was proposed by Liu et al. [57] based on joining non-overlapping reads and
                                    rearranging the reference sequences through primer sites accordingly. JTax was then used
                                    to join the filtered paired FASTQ files and to rebuild 16S-Udb, a reference unified database
                                    obtained by merging non-ambiguous, fully annotated, full-length 16S rRNA sequences
                                    from Greengenes, SILVA and Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) databases [58].
                                          Clustering of 16S reads into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) was performed by
                                    using USEARCH v. 11.0.667 [59] as follows: (1) low quality reads of all joined FASTQ
                                    were filtered (command: fastq_filter); (2) filtered reads (ranging from 1636 to 46,866) were
                                    then de-duplicated into unique reads (command: fastx_uniques); (3) unique reads were
                                    clustered into OTUs with a 97% identity (command: cluster_otus, option: -minsize 2); (4) all
                                    reads were aligned against the OTU representative sequences (command: usearch_global;
                                    options: identity cutoff 0.97, strand both); and (5) taxonomy of query OTU representative
                                    sequences was predicted (command: sintax; options: sintax cutoff 0.7, strand both).
                                          The OTUs clustering and assignment steps were repeated for the three analyses, HC,
                                    CRC and HC + CRC samples, in order to better adapt the pipeline and the analyses to each
                                    specific case study.

                                    4.6. Bioinformatics and Statistical Analysis
                                         OTUs table, assigned taxa table and samples metadata were used to build the phyloseq-
                                    class experiment-level objects through phyloseq package v. 1.28.0 [60] (HC: 901 taxa and
                                    20 samples; CRC: 2968 taxa and 40 samples; HC + CRC: 3010 taxa and 60 samples).
                                         Alpha-diversity of samples, that measures both the richness and diversity of species
                                    within a group, was calculated on taxa that were observed at least once, using alpha
                                    function of the Microbiome package v. 1.6.0 [61]. In particular, we used the following
                                    indices: CHAO1 that measures the observed richness (number of taxa) and Shannon’s
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                         16 of 19




                                    index that accounts for both abundance and evenness of the species present within a
                                    microbial community.
                                          Beta-diversity, that measures the differences in microbiome composition between
                                    groups, was calculated using the weighted unique fraction metric (UniFrac) that measures
                                    the distance on taxa counts table filtered keeping those having counts >1 in at least 10%
                                    of samples and then normalized through regularized logarithm transformation (DESeq2
                                    v. 1.24.0 [62]). UniFrac phylogenetic distances are based on the fraction of branch length
                                    shared between two communities within a phylogenetic tree constructed from the 16S rRNA
                                    gene sequences from all communities being compared. With weighted UniFrac, branch
                                    lengths are weighted based on the relative abundances of lineages within communities
                                    (community structure).
                                          PERMANOVA (Adonis), ANOSIM and PERMDISP2 (beta-dispersion) tests were
                                    performed through Vegan package v. 2.5-7 [63] to analyze the statistics associated with
                                    the samples grouping. In detail, PERMANOVA (Adonis), ANOSIM and PERMDISP are
                                    all measures of beta-diversity and test different hypotheses. In order to provide complete
                                    information in terms of location and dispersion of our data we performed all the three
                                    tests. PERMANOVA tests if the centroids, similar to means, of each group are significantly
                                    different from each other. ANOSIM is a method that tests whether two or more groups of
                                    samples are significantly different (similar to Adonis). It provides a measure of similarity,
                                    and its statistic R is based on the difference of mean ranks between groups and within
                                    groups. Having both tests significant gives more strength to the hypothesis of different
                                    composition between groups. PERMDISP is a measure of dispersion (variances) of the
                                    groups. If significant, the two groups are not homogenously dispersed. PERMANOVA and
                                    PERMDISP can be used to rigorously identify location vs. dispersion effects, respectively,
                                    in the space of the chosen resemblance measure. In our case, PERMDISP is always not
                                    significant, except for the comparison CRC/HC, and also from the plot is clearly visible
                                    a different dispersion. ANOSIM is very sensitive to heterogeneity while PERMANOVA
                                    (Adonis) was found to be largely unaffected by heterogeneity in Anderson and Walsh’s
                                    simulations [64] for balanced designs (as in the case of our study, enrolling 20 CRC and
                                    20 HC samples).
                                          Differential abundance analysis was performed using DESeq2 package at each taxa
                                    level, previously removing unassigned phyla, Cyanobacteria/Chloroplast and Propionibac-
                                    terium acnes species, identified as contaminant in negative controls (mean percentage of
                                    presence in the 6 negative controls: 35.8%), and keeping taxa having counts >1 in at least
                                    60% of samples for the downstream analysis. The design of the model for each comparison
                                    included the Run variable. The p-values obtained by the DeSeq2 differential abundance
                                    analysis are corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini and Hochberg method. Taxa
                                    were considered significantly differentially abundant if the associated adjusted p-value
                                    was <0.05. In order to define the associations between CCL2 blood concentration and some
                                    selected variables (i.e., CCL2 vs. Age, CCL2 vs. F. nucleatum abundance, CCL2 vs. B. fragilis
                                    abundance, CCL2 vs. G. haemolysans abundance, CCL2 vs. S. intermedius abundance) a
                                    linear multiple regression model was used, adding for each regression analysis the variable
                                    presence/absence of tumor. We considered the model validated if each time a variable
                                    was included in the model, its regression p-value was lower than 0.05 and the direction of
                                    effect consistent.

                                    5. Conclusions
                                         Our data, if confirmed in a larger than the present cohort, suggest the colon dysbiosis
                                    might contribute to CRC pathogenesis by inducing inflammation through the increase in
                                    bacterial species with known inflammatory potential. In particular, Fusobacterium nucleatum,
                                    also found more abundant in OW/OB_HC than in NW_HC microbiomes, might represent
                                    the putative link between obesity, inflammation and the previously reported increased
                                    CRC-risk in obese subjects. In conclusion, CRC-associated bacteria, together with the
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                                    17 of 19




                                    increased CCL2 circulating levels, could represent potential biomarkers to use in the CRC
                                    diagnosis and management.

                                    Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/10
                                    .3390/ijms221910747/s1.
                                    Author Contributions: C.N., execution of experiments, results analysis and interpretation, manuscript
                                    writing; I.G., bioinformatics and statistical analysis of data, manuscript writing; M.N., sample data
                                    collection; M.S., DNA extraction; F.C. (Fortunata Carbone), immunoluminescent experiments; C.Z.,
                                    V.P., G.D.D.P. and F.C. (Francesco Corcione), patient recruitment and clinical data collection; G.M.,
                                    E.D.C. and F.S., critical revision of the manuscript; L.S., study conception and design, results analysis
                                    and interpretation, manuscript writing, final revision and editing of the manuscript. All authors have
                                    read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                    Funding: This research was funded by research project SATIN (Sviluppo di Approcci Terapeutici
                                    Innovativi per patologie neoplastiche resistenti ai trattamenti) D.D. n. 355 del 5/06/2017–Fondo FESR
                                    2014/2020 to F.S. and L.S.; G.M. is funded by Fondazione Italiana Sclerosi Multipla (FISM; grants
                                    2016/R/18 and 2018/S/5), Progetti di Rilevante Interesse Nazionale (PRIN; grant 2017K55HLC 001),
                                    and Ministero della Salute (grant RF-2019-12371111); F.C. is supported by the Ministero della Salute
                                    (grant GR-2016-02363725).
                                    Institutional Review Board Statement: All the enrolled subjects gave their informed consent to
                                    participate in the study, according to the Helsinki Declaration 2013. The study was approved by the
                                    Ethics Committee of the “Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II”, authorization no. 318/20,
                                    9 September 2020, and the “Università degli Studi di Salerno”, authorization n. 50, 15 July 2015;
                                    amendment n. 141070, 26 November 2019.
                                    Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
                                    Data Availability Statement: The dataset supporting the results of this article was deposited in the
                                    Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under BioProject accession code PRJNA736583.
                                    Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Day, J.C. Population Projections of the United States by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin: 1995 to 2050; U.S. Bureau of the Census,
      Current Population Reports: Washington, DC, USA, 1996.
2.    AIRTUM Working Group. I tumori in Italia Rapporto 2016. Sopravvivenza. Epidemiol. Prev. 2018, 41 (Suppl. 1).
3.    Lee, M.S.; Menter, D.G.; Kopetz, S. Right versus left colon cancer biology: Integrating the consensus molecular subtypes. J. Natl.
      Compr. Cancer Netw. 2017, 15, 411–419. [CrossRef]
4.    Mana, M.D.; Hussey, A.M.; Tzouanas, C.N.; Imada, S.; Millan, Y.B.; Bahceci, D.; Saiz, D.R.; Webb, A.T.; Lewis, C.A.; Carmeliet, P.;
      et al. High-fat diet-activated fatty acid oxidation mediates intestinal stemness and tumorigenicity. Cell Rep. 2021, 35, 109212.
      [CrossRef]
5.    Biragyn, A.; Ferrucci, L. Gut dysbiosis: A potential link between increased cancer risk in ageing and inflammaging. Lancet Oncol.
      2018, 19, e295–e304. [CrossRef]
6.    Saus, E.; Iraola-Guzmán, S.; Willis, J.R.; Brunet-Vega, A.; Gabaldón, T. Microbiome and colorectal cancer: Roles in carcinogenesis
      and clinical potential. Mol. Asp. Med. 2019, 69, 93–106. [CrossRef]
7.    Sánchez-Alcoholado, L.; Ramos-Molina, B.; Otero, A.; Laborda-Illanes, A.; Ordóñez, R.; Medina, J.A.; Gómez-Millán, J.;
      Queipo-Ortuño, M.I. The role of the gut microbiome in colorectal cancer development and therapy response. Cancers 2020, 12,
      1406. [CrossRef]
8.    Kho, Z.Y.; Lal, S.K. The human gut microbiome—A potential controller of wellness and disease. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 1835.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.    Honda, K.; Littman, D.R. The microbiota in adaptive immune homeostasis and disease. Nat. Cell Biol. 2016, 535, 75–84. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
10.   Yoshimura, T. The chemokine MCP-1 (CCL2) in the host interaction with cancer: A foe or ally? Cell. Mol. Immunol. 2018, 15,
      335–345. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.   Hao, Q.; Vadgama, J.V.; Wang, P. CCL2/CCR2 signaling in cancer pathogenesis. Cell Commun. Signal. 2020, 18, 82. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
12.   Hao, Q.; Diaz, T.; Verduzco, A.D.R.; Magyar, C.E.; Zhong, J.; Elshimali, Y.; Rettig, M.B.; Henning, S.M.; Vadgama, J.V.; Wang, P.
      Arctigenin inhibits prostate tumor growth in high-fat diet fed mice through dual actions on adipose tissue and tumor. Sci. Rep.
      2020, 10, 1403–1413. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                                    18 of 19




13.   Fujita, K.; Hayashi, T.; Matsushita, M.; Uemura, M.; Nonomura, N. Obesity, inflammation, and prostate cancer. J. Clin. Med. 2019,
      8, 201. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Lu, Y.; Chen, Q.; Corey, E.; Xie, W.; Fan, J.; Mizokami, A.; Zhang, J. Activation of MCP-1/CCR2 axis promotes prostate cancer
      growth in bone. Clin. Exp. Metastasis 2008, 26, 161–169. [CrossRef]
15.   Cani, P.D.; Jordan, B.F. Gut microbiota-mediated inflammation in obesity: A link with gastrointestinal cancer. Nat. Rev.
      Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2018, 15, 671–682. [CrossRef]
16.   Brennan, C.A.; Garrett, W.S. Fusobacterium nucleatum—Symbiont, opportunist and oncobacterium. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2018, 17,
      156–166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.   Nardelli, C.; Granata, I.; D’Argenio, V.; Tramontano, S.; Compare, D.; Guarracino, M.R.; Nardone, G.; Pilone, V.; Sacchetti, L.
      Characterization of the duodenal mucosal microbiome in obese adult subjects by 16S rRNA sequencing. Microorganisms 2020,
      8, 485. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.   Granata, I.; Nardelli, C.; D’Argenio, V.; Tramontano, S.; Compare, D.; Guarracino, M.R.; Nardone, G.; Pilone, V.; Sacchetti, L.
      Duodenal metatranscriptomics to define human and microbial functional alterations associated with severe obesity: A pilot study.
      Microorganisms 2020, 8, 1811. [CrossRef]
19.   Tilg, H.; Adolph, T.E.; Gerner, R.R.; Moschen, A.R. The intestinal microbiota in colorectal cancer. Cancer Cell 2018, 33, 954–964.
      [CrossRef]
20.   Dejea, C.M.; Wick, E.C.; Hechenbleikner, E.M.; White, J.R.; Welch, J.L.M.; Rossetti, B.J.; Peterson, S.N.; Snesrud, E.C.; Borisy, G.G.;
      Lazarev, M.; et al. Microbiota organization is a distinct feature of proximal colorectal cancers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2014, 111,
      18321–18326. [CrossRef]
21.   Burns, M.B.; Lynch, J.; Starr, T.K.; Knights, D.; Blekhman, R. Virulence genes are a signature of the microbiome in the colorectal
      tumor microenvironment. Genome Med. 2015, 7, 55–66. [CrossRef]
22.   Flemer, B.; Warren, R.D.; Barrett, M.P.; Cisek, K.; Das, A.; Jeffery, I.; Hurley, E.; O’Riordain, M.; Shanahan, F.; O’Toole, P.W. The
      oral microbiota in colorectal cancer is distinctive and predictive. Gut 2017, 67, 1454–1463. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.   Song, M.; Chan, A.T.; Sun, J. Influence of the gut microbiome, diet, and environment on risk of colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology
      2020, 158, 322–340. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Friedenreich, C.M.; Ryder-Burbidge, C.; McNeil, J. Physical activity, obesity and sedentary behavior in cancer etiology: Epidemio-
      logic evidence and biologic mechanisms. Mol. Oncol. 2021, 15, 790–800. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.   Lauby-Secretan, B.; Scoccianti, C.; Loomis, D.; Grosse, Y.; Bianchini, F.; Straif, K. Body fatness and cancer—Viewpoint of the IARC
      working group. N. Engl. J. Med. 2016, 375, 794–798. [CrossRef]
26.   Whisner, C.; Aktipis, C.A. The role of the microbiome in cancer initiation and progression: How microbes and cancer cells utilize
      excess energy and promote one another’s growth. Curr. Nutr. Rep. 2019, 8, 42–51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.   Andoh, A.; Nishida, A.; Takahashi, K.; Inatomi, O.; Imaeda, H.; Bamba, S.; Kito, K.; Sugimoto, M.; Kobayashi, T. Comparison
      of the gut microbial community between obese and lean peoples using 16S gene sequencing in a Japanese population. J. Clin.
      Biochem. Nutr. 2016, 59, 65–70. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.   Gerritsen, J.; Smidt, H.; Rijkers, G.T.; De Vos, W.M. Intestinal microbiota in human health and disease: The impact of probiotics.
      Genes Nutr. 2011, 6, 209–240. [CrossRef]
29.   Ley, R.; Bäckhed, F.; Turnbaugh, P.; Lozupone, C.A.; Knight, R.; Gordon, J.I. Obesity alters gut microbial ecology. Proc. Natl. Acad.
      Sci. USA 2005, 102, 11070–11075. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.   Ley, R.; Turnbaugh, P.; Klein, S.; Gordon, J.I. Human gut microbes associated with obesity. Nature 2006, 444, 1022–1023. [CrossRef]
31.   Turnbaugh, P.; Hamady, M.; Yatsunenko, T.; Cantarel, B.L.; Duncan, A.; Ley, R.; Sogin, M.L.; Jones, W.J.; Roe, B.A.; Affourtit, J.P.;
      et al. A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins. Nature 2009, 457, 480–484. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.   Duncan, S.; Lobley, G.E.; Holtrop, G.; Ince, J.; Johnstone, A.; Louis, P.; Flint, H.J. Human colonic microbiota associated with diet,
      obesity and weight loss. Int. J. Obes. 2008, 32, 1720–1724. [CrossRef]
33.   Walters, W.A.; Xu, Z.; Knight, R. Meta-analyses of human gut microbes associated with obesity and IBD. FEBS Lett. 2014, 588,
      4223–4233. [CrossRef]
34.   Sze, M.A.; Schloss, P.D. Looking for a signal in the noise: Revisiting obesity and the microbiome. mBio 2016, 7, e01018-16.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.   Greathouse, K.L.; White, J.R.; Padgett, R.N.; Perrotta, B.G.; Jenkins, G.D.; Chia, N.; Chen, J. Gut microbiome meta-analysis
      reveals dysbiosis is independent of body mass index in predicting risk of obesity-associated CRC. BMJ Open Gastroenterol. 2019,
      6, e000247. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.   Makki, K.; Deehan, E.C.; Walter, J.; Bäckhed, F. The impact of dietary fiber on gut microbiota in host health and disease. Cell Host
      Microbe 2018, 23, 705–715. [CrossRef]
37.   Dai, Z.; Coker, O.O.; Nakatsu, G.; Wu, W.K.K.; Zhao, L.; Chen, Z.; Chan, F.K.L.; Kristiansen, K.; Sung, J.J.Y.; Wong, S.H.; et al.
      Multi-cohort analysis of colorectal cancer metagenome identified altered bacteria across populations and universal bacterial
      markers. Microbiome 2018, 6, 70–81. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.   Flemer, B.; Lynch, D.B.; Brown, J.M.R.; Jeffery, I.; Ryan, F.; Claesson, M.; O’Riordain, M.; Shanahan, F.; O’Toole, P.W. Tumour-
      associated and non-tumour-associated microbiota in colorectal cancer. Gut 2017, 66, 633–643. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10747                                                                                                       19 of 19




39.   Tahara, T.; Hirata, I.; Nakano, N.; Tahara, S.; Horiguchi, N.; Kawamura, T.; Okubo, M.; Ishizuka, T.; Yamada, H.; Yoshida, D.; et al.
      Potential link between Fusobacterium enrichment and DNA methylation accumulation in the inflammatory colonic mucosa in
      ulcerative colitis. Oncotarget 2017, 8, 61917–61926. [CrossRef]
40.   Ito, M.; Kanno, S.; Nosho, K.; Sukawa, Y.; Mitsuhashi, K.; Kurihara, H.; Igarashi, H.; Takahashi, T.; Tachibana, M.; Takahashi, H.;
      et al. Association of Fusobacterium nucleatum with clinical and molecular features in colorectal serrated pathway. Int. J. Cancer
      2015, 137, 1258–1268. [CrossRef]
41.   Mima, K.; Nishihara, R.; Qian, Z.R.; Cao, Y.; Sukawa, Y.; Nowak, J.A.; Yang, J.; Dou, R.; Masugi, Y.; Song, M.; et al. Fusobacterium
      nucleatumin colorectal carcinoma tissue and patient prognosis. Gut 2016, 65, 1973–1980. [CrossRef]
42.   Rubinstein, M.R.; Wang, X.; Liu, W.; Hao, Y.; Cai, G.; Han, Y.W. Fusobacterium nucleatum promotes colorectal carcinogenesis by
      modulating E-Cadherin/β-catenin signaling via its FadA adhesin. Cell Host Microbe 2013, 14, 195–206. [CrossRef]
43.   Goodman, B.; Gardner, H. The microbiome and cancer. J. Pathol. 2018, 244, 667–676. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.   Goodwin, A.C.; Shields, C.E.D.; Wu, S.; Huso, D.L.; Wu, X.; Murray, T.S.; Hacker-Prietz, A.; Rabizadeh, S.; Woster, P.; Sears, C.L.;
      et al. Polyamine catabolism contributes to enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis-induced colon tumorigenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
      USA 2011, 108, 15354–15359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.   Boleij, A.; Hechenbleikner, E.M.; Goodwin, A.C.; Badani, R.; Stein, E.M.; Lazarev, M.G.; Ellis, B.; Carroll, K.C.; Albesiano, E.; Wick,
      E.C.; et al. The bacteroides fragilis toxin gene is prevalent in the colon mucosa of colorectal cancer patients. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2015,
      60, 208–215. [CrossRef]
46.   Vizcaino, M.I.; Crawford, J.M. The colibactin warhead crosslinks DNA. Nat. Chem. 2015, 7, 411–417. [CrossRef]
47.   Bonnet, M.; Buc, E.; Sauvanet, P.; Darcha, C.; Dubois, D.; Pereira, B.; Déchelotte, P.; Bonnet, R.; Pezet, D.; Darfeuille-Michaud, A.
      Colonization of the human gut by E. coli and colorectal cancer risk. Clin. Cancer Res. 2014, 20, 859–867. [CrossRef]
48.   Nakatsu, G.; Li, X.; Zhou, H.; Sheng, J.; Wong, S.H.; Wu, W.K.K.; Ng, S.C.; Tsoi, H.; Dong, Y.; Zhang, N.; et al. Gut mucosal
      microbiome across stages of colorectal carcinogenesis. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 8727. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.   Chen, W.; Liu, F.; Ling, Z.; Tong, X.; Xiang, C. Human intestinal lumen and mucosa-associated microbiota in patients with
      colorectal cancer. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e39743. [CrossRef]
50.   Allali, I.; Delgado, S.; Marron, P.I.; Astudillo, A.; Yeh, J.J.; Ghazal, H.; Amzazi, S.; Keku, T.; Azcarate-Peril, M.A. Gut microbiome
      compositional and functional differences between tumor and non-tumor adjacent tissues from cohorts from the US and Spain.
      Gut Microbes 2015, 6, 161–172. [CrossRef]
51.   Tsoi, H.; Chu, E.S.; Zhang, X.; Sheng, J.; Nakatsu, G.; Ng, S.C.; Chan, A.; Chan, F.K.; Sung, J.J.Y.; Yu, J. Peptostreptococcus anaerobius
      induces intracellular cholesterol biosynthesis in colon cells to induce proliferation and causes dysplasia in mice. Gastroenterology
      2017, 152, 1419–1433.e5. [CrossRef]
52.   Lim, S.Y.; Yuzhalin, A.; Gordon-Weeks, A.N.; Muschel, R.J. Targeting the CCL2-CCR2 signaling axis in cancer metastasis.
      Oncotarget 2016, 7, 28697–28710. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.   Conley, M.N.; Wong, C.P.; Duyck, K.M.; Hord, N.; Ho, E.; Sharpton, T.J. Aging and serum MCP-1 are associated with gut
      microbiome composition in a murine model. PeerJ 2016, 4, e1854. [CrossRef]
54.   Heintz, C.; Mair, W. You are what you host: Microbiome modulation of the aging process. Cell 2014, 156, 408–411. [CrossRef]
55.   Garborg, K.; Bretthauer, M.; De Lange, T. Quality indicators in colonoscopy. Curr. Treat. Options Gastroenterol. 2017, 15, 416–428.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.   Callahan, B.J.; McMurdie, P.; Rosen, M.J.; Han, A.W.; Johnson, A.J.; Holmes, S. DADA2: High-resolution sample inference from
      Illumina amplicon data. Nat. Methods 2016, 13, 581–583. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.   Liu, T.; Chen, C.-Y.; Chen-Deng, A.; Chen, Y.-L.; Wang, J.-Y.; Hou, Y.-I.; Lin, M.-C. Joining Illumina paired-end reads for classifying
      phylogenetic marker sequences. BMC Bioinform. 2020, 21, 105–117. [CrossRef]
58.   Agnihotry, S.; Sarangi, A.N.; Aggarwal, R. Construction & assessment of a unified curated reference database for improving the
      taxonomic classification of bacteria using 16S rRNA sequence data. Indian J. Med. Res. 2020, 151, 93–103. [CrossRef]
59.   Edgar, R.C. Search and clustering orders of magnitude faster than BLAST. Bioinformatics 2010, 26, 2460–2461. [CrossRef]
60.   McMurdie, P.; Holmes, S. phyloseq: An R package for reproducible interactive analysis and graphics of microbiome census data.
      PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e61217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61.   Lahti, L.; Shetty, S. Bioconductor, 2017-Tools for Microbiome Analysis in R. Microbiome Package Version. Available online:
      http://microbiome.github.io/microbiome (accessed on 5 August 2021).
62.   Love, M.I.; Huber, W.; Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq. Genome
      Biol. 2014, 15, 550. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.   Oksanen, J.; Blanchet, F.G.; Friendly, M.; Kindt, R.; Legendre, P.; McGlinn, D.; Minchin, P.R.; O’Hara, R.B.; Simpson, G.L.; Solymos,
      P.; et al. Vegan: Community Ecology Package. R Package Version 2.5–7. Available online: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=
      vegan (accessed on 5 August 2021).
64.   Anderson, M.J.; Walsh, D.C.I. PERMANOVA, ANOSIM, and the Mantel test in the face of heterogeneous dispersions: What null
      hypothesis are you testing? Ecol. Monogr. 2013, 83, 557–574. [CrossRef]
