            cancers
Article
Commensal Fecal Microbiota Profiles Associated with Initial
Stages of Intestinal Mucosa Damage: A Pilot Study
Sergio Ruiz-Saavedra 1,2 , Silvia Arboleya 1,2 , Alicja M. Nogacka 1,2 , Carmen González del Rey 3 ,
Adolfo Suárez 2,4 , Ylenia Diaz 5 , Miguel Gueimonde 1,2 , Nuria Salazar 1,2 , Sonia González 2,6, * and
Clara G. de los Reyes-Gavilán 1,2, *

                                         1   Department of Microbiology and Biochemistry of Dairy Products, Instituto de Productos Lácteos de
                                             Asturias (IPLA-CSIC), 33300 Villaviciosa, Spain; sergio.ruiz@ipla.csic.es (S.R.-S.);
                                             silvia.arboleya@ipla.csic.es (S.A.); alicja.nogacka@ipla.csic.es (A.M.N.); mgueimonde@ipla.csic.es (M.G.);
                                             nuriasg@ipla.csic.es (N.S.)
                                         2   Diet, Microbiota and Health Group, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA),
                                             33011 Oviedo, Spain; adolfo.suarez@sespa.es
                                         3   Department of Anatomical Pathology, Central University Hospital of Asturias (HUCA), 33011 Oviedo, Spain;
                                             carmenchugonzalezdelrey@gmail.com
                                         4   Digestive Service, Central University Hospital of Asturias (HUCA), 33011 Oviedo, Spain
                                         5   Digestive Service, Carmen and Severo Ochoa Hospital, 33819 Cangas del Narcea, Spain;
                                             yleniads@hotmail.com
                                         6   Department of Functional Biology, University of Oviedo, 33006 Oviedo, Spain
                                         *   Correspondence: soniagsolares@uniovi.es (S.G.); greyes_gavilan@ipla.csic.es (C.G.d.l.R.-G.)


                                         Simple Summary: The high incidence and mortality of colorectal cancer (CRC) have influenced
                                         society to promote research in this field. Dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiota occurring in CRC
                                         has been extensively studied. However, microbial shifts occurring at the initial stages of mucosal
                                         alterations are less known. In this work, the fecal microbiota of volunteers diagnosed with intestinal
                                         polyps were compared with the microbial compositions of nonpathological control volunteers,
                                         thereby focusing on the nature of the hyperplastic polyps or conventional adenomas, as well as on
Citation: Ruiz-Saavedra, S.; Arboleya,
                                         the degree of dysplasia (low grade vs. high grade) in the last ones as indicators of colorectal cancer
S.; Nogacka, A.M.; González del Rey,
                                         risk development. The findings provide insights into the microbiota changes occurring at the early
C.; Suárez, A.; Diaz, Y.; Gueimonde,
                                         stages of intestinal mucosal lesions. This work could set a starting point for further studies focusing
M.; Salazar, N.; González, S.; de los
                                         on the influence of diet and lifestyle factors on the initial alterations of the intestinal mucosa and for
Reyes-Gavilán, C.G. Commensal Fecal
Microbiota Profiles Associated with
                                         the proposal of strategies for their prevention.
Initial Stages of Intestinal Mucosa
Damage: A Pilot Study. Cancers 2024,     Abstract: Progressive intestinal mucosal damage occurs over years prior to colorectal cancer (CRC) de-
16, 104. https://doi.org/10.3390/        velopment. The endoscopic screening of polyps and histopathological examination are used clinically
cancers16010104                          to determine the risk and progression of mucosal lesions. We analyzed fecal microbiota compositions
                                         using 16S rRNA gene-based metataxonomic analyses and the levels of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)
Academic Editor: Heike Allgayer
                                         using gas chromatography in volunteers undergoing colonoscopy and histopathological analyses to
Received: 3 November 2023                determine the microbiota shifts occurring at the early stages of intestinal mucosa alterations. The
Revised: 19 December 2023                results were compared between diagnosis groups (nonpathological controls and polyps), between
Accepted: 22 December 2023
                                         samples from individuals with hyperplastic polyps or conventional adenomas, and between grades
Published: 24 December 2023
                                         of dysplasia in conventional adenomas. Some microbial taxa from the Bacillota and Euryarchaeota
                                         phyla were the most affected when comparing the diagnosis and histopathological groups. Deeper
                                         microbiota alterations were found in the conventional adenomas than in the hyperplastic polyps.
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.        The Ruminococcus torques group was enriched in both the hyperplastic polyps and conventional
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.       adenomas, whereas the family Eggerthellaceae was enriched only in the hyperplastic polyps. The
This article is an open access article   abundance of Prevotellaceae, Oscillospiraceae, Methanobacteriaceae, Streptococcaceae, Christensenellaceae,
distributed under the terms and          Erysipelotrichaceae, and Clostridiaceae shifted in conventional adenomas depending on the grade of
conditions of the Creative Commons       dysplasia, without affecting the major SCFAs. Our results suggest a reorganization of microbial
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                         consortia involved in gut fermentative processes.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).




Cancers 2024, 16, 104. https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16010104                                               https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cancers
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                                2 of 18



                        Keywords: fecal microbiota; intestinal mucosa; intestinal polyps; hyperplastic polyps; conventional
                        adenomas




                        1. Introduction
                              The progression of colorectal cancer (CRC) is a gradual process in which the intestinal
                        mucosa damage generally occurs over years [1,2] and seems to be strongly linked to modi-
                        fiable external factors, such as lifestyle and diet [3–6]. The detection of endoscopic polyp
                        lesions, accompanied by the further histological examination of resected polyps or mucosa
                        samples during colonoscopy, is used in routine clinical practice to determine the degree of
                        mucosal damage and the risk of CRC-related lesions [7,8]. Most CRC cases (>80%) arise
                        from the adenomatous pathway of genetic alterations related to phenotypic changes in the
                        adenoma–carcinoma sequence. Conventional colorectal adenomas frequently carry dys-
                        plastic cells with low-grade dysplasia (LGD), which generally occurs in tubular adenomas
                        (TAs), tubulovillous adenomas (TVAs), or with high-grade dysplasia (HGD). The alterna-
                        tive pathway is less frequent (<20%), originates from BRAF and KRAS gene mutations, and
                        is linked to the progression of serrated lesions to carcinoma. The serrated lesions include
                        hyperplastic polyps (HPs), as well as traditional serrated adenoma and sessile serrated
                        lesions (SSLs) that normally contain cells with dysplasia [9]. Hyperplastic polyps generally
                        present low risk of evolving to neoplasia, whereas LGD and HGD present a progressively
                        augmented risk of adenocarcinoma development [7,10,11].
                              Changes occurring over time on the intestinal microbiota, which are partly driven
                        by their interaction with dietary components, can influence host health [12–14]. Dietary
                        components, such as complex carbohydrates (fibers) and, to a lesser extent, peptides and
                        fats, reach the colon undigested and can be used as fermentable substrates by the colonic
                        microbiota. The major microbial products of these fermentations are short-chain fatty acids
                        (SCFAs), which mainly include acetate, propionate, and butyrate, that promote differential
                        effects in host health [12,13]. In contrast, the ammonium, phenolic, and indolic compounds
                        produced by the microbial colonic fermentation of aromatic amino acids, as well as hydro-
                        gen sulfide, have mutagenic, genotoxic, and cytotoxic potential regarding the intestinal
                        mucosa, which could alter the microbiota [14]. Some intestinal microorganisms can produce
                        and excrete toxic compounds as toxins and some protease-like factors, such as the colibactin
                        produced by Escherichia coli, the cytotoxin A produced by Helicobacter pylori, an enterotoxin
                        produced by Bacteroides fragilis, the adhesin A produced by Fusobacterium nucleatum, or
                        the cysteine protease-like factor produced by Shigella flexneri, among others [15]. All these
                        factors modify the intestinal environment and may contribute to the onset and progression
                        of gut mucosal damage, as well as the further establishment of preneoplastic lesions.
                              Dysbiosis occurs in CRC and in preneoplastic stages. The “driver-passenger” theory
                        tries to explain how the gut bacteria can induce carcinogenesis through progressive damage
                        of the DNA in the gut epithelium (“drivers”), thereby modifying the gut environment
                        to promote the proliferation of “passenger” bacteria [16]. Most studies have focused
                        on the microbiota of CRC, whereas less information is available regarding shifts in the
                        microbiota profiles in the initial intestinal mucosal lesions that develop prior to CRC [17,18].
                        This pilot study sheds light on the changes to the fecal microbiota associated with early
                        intestinal mucosal lesions by considering the morphological alterations of intestinal polyps
                        (hyperplastic and conventional adenomas) and the grade of dysplasia in the adenomatous
                        pathway of carcinogenesis.

                        2. Materials and Methods
                        2.1. Study Design and Volunteers
                            Volunteers were randomly recruited by trained physicians from among those subjects
                        who reached out to the Digestive Section at the Central University Hospital of Asturias
                        (HUCA) or to the Carmen and Severo Ochoa Hospital in Asturias (North of Spain) for
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                          3 of 18



                        consultation about clinical symptoms or as part of the CRC screening program in the
                        region between October 2019 and December 2021. To enroll in the study, volunteers
                        aged 40–79 years were first informed about the objectives and procedures and signed
                        an informed consent to participate. Anamnesis was performed, and fecal samples were
                        collected at the time of recruitment. Biopsies of the intestinal mucosa and polyps were
                        resected during colonoscopy and examined at the Department of Anatomical Pathology of
                        HUCA, as described elsewhere [19]. Patients reporting specific cancer treatment at the time
                        of the study, treatment with medical drugs in the previous two months, immune-related
                        diseases, or previous surgery of the digestive system were excluded. Individuals were
                        classified according to the colonoscopy and histopathological examination. The group of
                        “controls” included individuals with normal colonoscopy results and confirmation of the
                        absence of mucosal lesions according to histopathological analysis, whereas the group of
                        “polyps” included those individuals with alterations detected through colonoscopy results
                        and confirmed by histopathological analyses. This group included individuals with either
                        hyperplastic polyps or conventional adenomas as per morphological features detected
                        by histopathology; conventional adenomas were subclassified depending on the grade of
                        dysplasia. This project was evaluated and approved by the Regional Ethics Committee of
                        the Clinical Research of Asturias (Ref. 163/19) and the Committee on Bioethics of CSIC
                        (Ref. 174/2020). This study followed the fundamental principles of the Declaration of
                        Helsinki, through the Council of Europe Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine,
                        and Spanish legislation on bioethics. Personal data protection was treated according to
                        Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of October 1995 on the
                        Protection of Individuals.

                        2.2. Fecal Sample Processing
                             Instructions and material necessary for collecting fecal samples were provided to the
                        volunteers. Briefly, patients deposited fresh fecal samples in sterile plastic containers and
                        transported them to the hospitals participating in the study within a period not exceeding
                        two hours after deposition. The samples were then frozen and transported to the laboratory.
                        Frozen samples (4 g) were weighed, diluted 1/10, and homogenized with sterile phosphate-
                        buffered saline (PBS) in a LabBlender 400 Stomacher (Seward Medical, London, UK) for
                        3 min at maximum speed. After 15 min of centrifugation at 4 ◦ C and 14,000 rpm, the
                        supernatants and pellets were separated and kept frozen at −20 ◦ C until use.

                        2.3. DNA Extraction and Microbiota Metataxonomic Analyses
                              The fecal pellets obtained after dilution and homogenization were used to extract
                        DNA. The Q protocol for DNA extraction defined by the International Human Microbiome
                        Standards Consortium was applied using the QIAamp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen,
                        Sussex, UK) [20]. After extraction, a 260/280 ratio was determined using a Take3 Microvol-
                        ume plate and Gen5 microplate reader (BioTek Instrument Inc., Winooski, VT, USA). DNA
                        was frozen at −20 ◦ C until analysis. Sequencing and annotation of the bacterial 16S rRNA
                        genes were performed at Novogene Bioinformatics Technology Co., Ltd., Cambridge, UK.
                        First, using specific primers connected with barcodes, the variable region V3–V4 of bacterial
                        16S rRNA genes was amplified using PCR protocol, and a DNA library was prepared. The
                        Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform was used to sequence the libraries. After obtaining each in-
                        dividual read, they were assigned to the samples using barcodes and merged using FLASH
                        (version 1.2.7). QIIME (version 1.7.0) was used to obtain high-quality clean tags, thereby
                        allowing the removal of low-quality sequences. The obtained tags were then compared
                        with the reference SILVA 138 database, and chimeric sequences were removed using the
                        UCHIME algorithm. To perform sequencing analysis, effective tags were utilized using
                        Uparse software (Uparse V 7.0.1090). Sequences sharing ≥97% homology were assigned to
                        the same OTUs, and OTU abundance was normalized. The representative sequence for
                        each OTU was obtained against the SSU rRNA database of SILVA138 using QIIME (V 1.7.0)
                        and the mothur method to annotate species at each taxonomic rank. Chao1 and Shannon
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                         4 of 18



                        indices of alpha diversity were obtained using QIIME (V 1.7.0) and are represented using
                        GraphPad Prism 9 software. PCoA of beta diversity was calculated based on Bray Cur-
                        tis dissimilarity index and visualized using “vegan” and “ggplot2” packages of RStudio
                        software version 1.4.3.

                        2.4. Fecal Short-Chain Fatty Acid Concentrations
                             Gas chromatography analyses were performed to determine the concentration of
                        SCFAs, acetic, propionic, butyric, isobutyric, isovaleric, valeric, and caproic acids, in
                        feces following a previously described procedure, with minor modifications [21]. Briefly,
                        fecal supernatants were diluted with methanol, 20% v/v formic acid, and an internal
                        standard to reach a dilution of 10/65. Next, the dilutions were centrifuged for 10 min at
                        room temperature and 14,000 rpm to obtain the supernatants, which were transferred to
                        suitable chromatography vials. To identify and quantify SCFAs, a chromatograph 6890N
                        (Agilent Technologies Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA) connected to a mass spectrometry detector
                        (MS) 5973N (Agilent Technologies) and a flame ionization detector (FID) were used. The
                        theoretical detection limit values were calculated for minor SCFAs and applied to samples
                        that were not detectable.

                        2.5. Statistical Analyses
                             IBM SPSS software (version 25.0; IBM SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) and RStudio
                        software version 1.4.3 were used to analyze the data. GraphPad Prism 9 and RStudio
                        software were used for graphical representations. Goodness of fit to the normal distribution
                        was checked using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. As normality of the variables was not
                        achieved, nonparametric tests were applied. Overall, categorical variables were presented
                        as numbers and percentages, and continuous variables were presented as mean ± standard
                        deviation values. Mann–Whitney U tests were performed for pairwise comparison of
                        continuous variables (p-value < 0.05), whereas the categorical variable “gender” was
                        analyzed by a chi-squared test.
                             Alpha and beta diversity indices were compared between diagnosis groups. A Mann–
                        Whitney U test was applied to compare alpha diversity indices, whereas PCoA was per-
                        formed on beta diversity using Bray–Curtis dissimilarity index. Relative microbial abun-
                        dances were obtained from OTU data and analyzed using Mann–Whitney U tests to detect
                        differences between groups at the taxonomic levels of phylum, family, and genus. The
                        Benjamini–Hochberg procedure was applied for multiple test comparisons. LEfSe were
                        conducted to estimate taxa by significantly discriminating the groups under study by using
                        the Kruskal–Wallis rank sum test and a Wilcoxon test for pairwise comparison followed by
                        a logarithmic linear discriminant analysis (LDA) to estimate the effect size at a threshold
                        of 2.0, by using the LEfSe Galaxy web tool [22]. Only microbial families and genera with
                        relative abundance of at least 1% in at least two samples were considered in the analysis.
                        The differences in SCFA concentrations between the groups were compared using the
                        Mann–Whitney test. Spearman correlations were performed to explore the associations
                        between microbiota and SCFAs. Heatmaps were generated using “corrplot” R package.
                        Microbial families significantly correlated with SCFAs were examined as predictors of fecal
                        SCFAs using regression analyses, adjusting by diagnosis, and histopathological groups.

                        3. Results
                        3.1. General Characteristics of the Sample Population
                             The main anthropometric characteristics of volunteers from each diagnosis group and
                        the main histopathological features of mucosal biopsies are shown in Table 1. Individuals
                        in the control group did not present histological lesions of the intestinal mucosa, while
                        volunteers with polyps displayed hyperplastic polyps or conventional adenomas. Individ-
                        uals presenting conventional adenomas were more abundant than those with hyperplastic
                        polyps (25 vs. 9 individuals). Conventional adenomas presented LGD (TA or TVA polyps)
                        or HGD.
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                                           5 of 18



                        Table 1. General characteristics of the sample population according to the diagnosis after colonoscopy
                        and histopathological analysis of intestinal mucosa resected samples during colonoscopy.

                                         Variables                          Control (n = 20)                 Polyps (n = 34)
                         Male gender                                           6 (30.0%)                        19 (55.9%)
                         Age (years)                                             60 ± 9                           61 ± 6
                         BMI (kg/m2 ) †                                       25.67 ± 3.81                     27.87 ± 4.16
                         Histopathological analysis ††
                         NP                                                    20 (100.0%)                           -
                         Hyperplastic polyps                                         -                          9 (26.5%)
                         Conventional adenomas                                       -                          25 (73.5%)
                           LGD                                                       -                              20
                           HGD                                                       -                               5
                        Values are presented in terms of n (percentage in the sample population) or mean ± standard deviation (SD). No
                        significant differences (p ≥ 0.05) were found for gender (chi-squared test), age, and BMI (Mann–Whitney U test)
                        between diagnosis groups. † The number of volunteers with BMI available information was the following: control:
                        n = 14; polyps: n = 27. †† Samples from individuals with more than one type of polyp were considered in the
                        histopathological group of that of the highest risk. BMI: body mass index; NP: nonpathological histology; LGD:
                        conventional adenomas with low-grade dysplasia; HGD: conventional adenomas with high-grade dysplasia.


                        3.2. Fecal Microbiota Profiles
                             Stool microbiota compositions were determined using partial 16S rRNA gene sequenc-
                        ing. The 54 fecal samples yielded 9585 OTUs. We compared the microbiota profiles accord-
                        ing to diagnosis and histopathological groups (nonpathological controls and polyps: 20 and
                        34 samples, respectively) and analyzed the differences in microbiota between individu-
                        als presenting hyperplastic polyps (nine samples) or conventional adenomas (25 samples)
                        within the group of polyps. We further analyzed the fecal microbiota of individuals carrying
                        conventional adenomas with LGD (20 samples) or HGD (five samples).

                        3.2.1. Microbiota Comparison between Control and Polyps Groups
                             Figure 1 presents the main fecal microbiota profiles of the two groups: the control
                        and polyps. The relative abundance of phyla in the control and polyps groups followed
                        the order Bacillota (former Firmicutes) > Actinomycetota > Bacteroidota > Pseudomonadota
                        (formerly Proteobacteria) > Verrucomicrobiota (Figure 1A). The family Methanobacteriaceae
                        was significantly less abundant in the polyps group than in the control group (1.37% vs.
                        2.11%, respectively), and the same was observed for Oscillospiraceae and Christensenellaceae,
                        which were more abundant in the control group than in the polyps group (Figure 1B)
                        (3.08% vs. 2.18% and 1.89% vs. 1.26%, respectively). Alpha diversity, represented by
                        Chao1 and Shannon indices (Figure 1C,D), did not differ significantly between the groups.
                        Regarding beta diversity, principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) based on the Bray–Curtis
                        dissimilarity index using all OTU normalized relative abundances did not clearly separate
                        the groups (Figure 1E). Linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) testing was con-
                        ducted to identify the genera contributing the most to differentiating the control and polyps
                        group. Differentially increased abundances of the Ruminococcus_torques group (family:
                        Lachnospiraceae; order: Lachnospirales) and Eubacterium_hallii (family: Lachnospiraceae; order:
                        Lachnospirales) in contrast to decreased abundances of Ruminococcus (family: Ruminococ-
                        caceae; order: Oscillospirales), g_Clostridia_UCG-014, the Christensenellaceae R-7 group (family:
                        Christensenellaceae; order: Chistensenellales), and Methanobrevibacter (family: Methanobacteri-
                        aceae; order: Methanobacteriales) were the most relevant differences found between the feces
                        samples from individuals diagnosed with polyps with respect to the controls (Figure 1F).
                        The cladogram generated from the LEfSe results (Figure 1 G) highlights the enrichment
                        of the order Coriobacteriales and members from the family Lachnospiraceae, as well as the
                        depletion of the families Christensenellaceae, Oscillospiraceae, f_Clostridia_UCG-014, and
                        Methanobacteriaceae in the polyps group.
Cancers 2024, 16, 104 Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                                            6 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                        7




                                      Figure 1. Differences  in 1.
                                                         Figure composition
                                                                     Differences and
                                                                                   in taxonomic     diversity of
                                                                                      composition and              fecaldiversity
                                                                                                           taxonomic     microbiota     between
                                                                                                                                     of fecal       diagnosis
                                                                                                                                               microbiota   between diag
                                      groups (control andgroups    (control
                                                             polyps).    (A) and   polyps).
                                                                              Relative        (A) Relative
                                                                                         abundance     at theabundance
                                                                                                               phylum at  levelthe  phylum level
                                                                                                                                  (including           (including top-10
                                                                                                                                                 top-10 most
                                                         abundant).
                                      abundant). (B) Relative  abundance(B) ofRelative  abundance
                                                                                 bacteria at          of level
                                                                                               the family bacteria at   the family
                                                                                                                  (including    familieslevel   (including
                                                                                                                                           showing           families sho
                                                                                                                                                       relative
                                      abundance >1% inrelative      abundance
                                                           the sample             >1% in *,
                                                                           population).    theStatistically
                                                                                                sample population).
                                                                                                             significant*,differences
                                                                                                                            Statisticallybetween
                                                                                                                                             significant  differences be
                                                                                                                                                       control
                                                         control and polyps groups (Mann–Withney U test adjusted by Benjamini–Hochberg; p < 0.05
                                      and polyps groups (Mann–Withney U test adjusted by Benjamini–Hochberg; p < 0.05). Box plots of
                                                         plots of alpha diversity values: (C) Chao1 index and (D) Shannon index. Box elements sho
                                      alpha diversity values:
                                                         median,(C)upper,
                                                                      Chao1 andindex   and quartiles.
                                                                                    lower   (D) Shannon Dotsindex.    Box elements
                                                                                                               represent                 show the
                                                                                                                            values outside        the median,
                                                                                                                                                      IQR. (E) PCoA o
                                      upper, and lower quartiles.    Dots    represent   values  outside  the  IQR.   (E) PCoA     of beta
                                                         diversity using Bray–Curtis dissimilarity index. (F) Bacterial taxa (at the genus   diversity   using taxonomic
                                      Bray–Curtis dissimilarity
                                                         showing  index.   (F) Bacterial
                                                                     differential         taxa (at the
                                                                                   abundance            genus
                                                                                                 according      taxonomic
                                                                                                             to linear  effectlevel)
                                                                                                                                size showing
                                                                                                                                      discriminant differential
                                                                                                                                                       analysis (LEfSe) f
                                      abundance according to    linear of
                                                         comparison         control
                                                                         effect sizevs. polyps   groups.
                                                                                      discriminant        (G) (LEfSe)
                                                                                                      analysis Cladogram     generated
                                                                                                                          for the           from of
                                                                                                                                    comparison     LEfSe  between contr
                                                                                                                                                        control
                                                         polyps   groups.    Yellow   circles represent  bacterial   taxa  that  show
                                      vs. polyps groups. (G) Cladogram generated from LEfSe between control and polyps groups. Yellow    no  significant  differences be
                                                         groups,    and   green  and   red circles  represent   taxa  whose    abundances
                                      circles represent bacterial taxa that show no significant differences between groups, and green and       were   statistically differ
                                      red circles represent taxa whose abundances were statistically differential between groups. For LEfSe,
                                      only genera with relative abundances higher than 1% in at least two samples were included.
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                              7 of 18



                        3.2.2. Microbiota Comparison between Individuals with Hyperplastic Polyps and
                        Conventional Adenomas
                              We compared the fecal microbiota of individuals with hyperplastic polyps and those
                        with conventional adenomas (Table 1). Differences in the fecal microbiota profiles were
                        observed at phylum and family taxonomic level (Figure 2A,B). Significantly (p < 0.05)
                        lower abundances of the Ruminococcaceae, Erysipelotrichaceae, and Clostridiaceae families
                        were found in fecal samples from individuals with conventional adenomas than in those
                        presenting hyperplastic polyps (Figure 2B) (10.70% vs. 15.22%, 0.88% vs. 3.52% and 0.80%
                        vs. 1.37%, respectively). LEfSe analysis (Figure 2C) evidenced that the genera Holdemanella
                        (family: Erysipelotrichaceae; order: Erysipelotrichales), Clostridium sensu_stricto 1 (family:
                        Clostridiaceae; order: Clostridiales), and Clostridium sp. CAG-352 (family Ruminococcaceae;
                        order: Oscilllospirales) were enriched in the feces of individuals with hyperplastic polyps,
                        which was in contrast to the higher comparative abundance of Alistipes (family Rikenellaceae;
                        order: Bacteroidales) in the group of individuals with conventional adenomas. Cladograms
                        generated from the LEfSe (Figure 2D) confirmed differential abundances for the upper taxa
                        related to the genera mentioned above, including the Erysipelotrichaceae, Clostridiaceae, and
                        Ruminococcaceae families, thereby also affecting the orders Erysipelotrichales and Clostridiales,
                        as well as the Bacillota phylum.

                        3.2.3. Shifts in the Microbiota of Individuals with Hyperplastic Polyps
                             To identify changes that specifically affected the microbiota of individuals with hy-
                        perplastic polyps, we compared their fecal microbiota with that from the control group
                        (Figure 3). LEfSe analysis at the genus level revealed a differentially higher abundance of
                        Ruminococcus_torques in the feces of individuals with hyperplastic polyps as compared to
                        the controls (Figure 3A). The corresponding cladogram also showed a differentially higher
                        abundance of the family Eggerthellaceae and the order Coriobacteriales in the group with
                        hyperplastic polyps (Figure 3B).

                        3.2.4. Shifts in the Microbiota of Individuals with Conventional Adenomas
                             The fecal microbiota of individuals diagnosed with conventional adenomas were
                        compared with the microbiota of the control group. We further compared the micro-
                        biota from individuals without intestinal mucosal lesions and the microbiota from those
                        presenting conventional adenomas with different grades of dysplasia (LGD and HGD).
                        LEfSe analysis showed a differential enrichment of the Ruminococcus_torques and Ru-
                        minococcus_gnavus groups in patients with conventional adenomas (Figure 4A,B). In con-
                        trast, a differential depletion of the following taxa was also found in these individuals:
                        genus Methanobrevibacter/family Methanobacteriaceae/order Methanobacteriales; genus Holde-
                        manella/family Erysipelotrichaceae; genus Christensenellaceae R-7 group/family Christensenel-
                        laceae/order Christensenellales; genus Clostridia_UCG-014 and its related upper taxa; the
                        Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1/family Clostridiaceae/order Clostridiales; genus Ruminococcus,
                        Oscillospiraceae_UCG-002, and Clostridium sp. CAG-352 within the order Oscillospirales; and
                        genus Romboutsia/family Peptostreptococcaceae/order Peptostreptococcales_Tissierellales.
                             The relative abundance of the phylum Euryarchaeota decreased abruptly in the feces
                        of individuals with conventional adenomas displaying HGD as compared to control sam-
                        ples (Table S1). A consistent decrease (p < 0.05) related to the increase in the grade of
                        dysplasia was found for the families Methanobacteriaceae (2.11% in controls; 1.63% in LGD;
                        0.26% in HGD), Christensenellaceae (1.89% in controls; 1.11% in LGD; 1.00% in HGD), and
                        Erysipelotrichaceae (1.75% in controls; 0.99% in LGD; 1.00% in HGD) (Figure 5). Notably,
                        the families Oscillospiraceae, Clostridiaceae, and f_Clostridia_UCG-014 showed a significant
                        decrease in samples from individuals with LGD conventional adenomas with respect
                        to the control group (2.12% vs. 3.08 %, 0.72% vs. 1.47% and 0.70% vs. 1.05%, respec-
                        tively), whereas Prevotellaceae and Streptococcaceae decreased significantly in samples from
                        volunteers with HGD conventional adenomas (1.68% vs. 4.55% and 0.25% vs. 2.25%, respec-
                        tively). Significant variations in some microbial genera from the families mentioned just
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                                                   8 of 18



                           above as related to the grade of dysplastic lesions supported these results: these included
                           Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1 (Clostridiaceae), Streptococcus (Streptococcaceae), Methanobrevibac-
   Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                              9 of 20
                           ter (Methanobacteriaceae), Holdemanella (Erysipelotrichaceae), Christensenellaceae_R-7 group
                           (Christensenellaceae), and genus Clostridia_UCG-014 (Table S2).




                           Figure  2. 2.
                              Figure  Differences   in fecalin fecal
                                            Differences       microbiota  compositions from
                                                                       microbiota                      from diagnosed
                                                                                                individuals
                                                                                     compositions              individuals with  hyperplastic
                                                                                                                               diagnosed     with
                              hyperplastic
                           polyps or         polyps or
                                      conventional        conventional
                                                       adenomas.          adenomas.
                                                                   (A) Relative        (A)
                                                                                 abundance  Relative
                                                                                               of bacteria at the of
                                                                                                      abundance        bacteria
                                                                                                                   phylum    levelat the  phylum
                                                                                                                                    (including
                           top-10   (including
                              levelmost           top-10
                                         abundant).    (B) most   abundant).
                                                           Relative abundance(B)    Relativeat the
                                                                                 of bacteria   abundance
                                                                                                     family of
                                                                                                            levelbacteria   at the
                                                                                                                   (including   thosefamily  level
                                                                                                                                       families
                              (including
                           showing        thoseabundance
                                      relative    families showing
                                                               >1% inrelative  abundance
                                                                        the sample).         >1% in thesignificant
                                                                                        *, Statistically  sample). *, differences
                                                                                                                        Statisticallybetween
                                                                                                                                       significant
                              differences between samples from individuals with hyperplastic polyps or conventional adenomas
                           samples from individuals with hyperplastic polyps or conventional adenomas (Mann–Whitney U test
                              (Mann–Whitney U test adjusted by Benjamini–Hochberg; p < 0.05). (C) Bacterial taxa (at the genus
                           adjusted by Benjamini–Hochberg; p < 0.05). (C) Bacterial taxa (at the genus taxonomic level) showing
                              taxonomic level) showing differential abundance according to linear effect size discriminant
                           differential abundance
                              analysis (LEfSe)        according
                                                 for the         to linear
                                                          comparison       effect size discriminant
                                                                        of hyperplastic   polyps andanalysis     (LEfSe)adenomas
                                                                                                        conventional      for the comparison
                                                                                                                                      groups. (D)
                           of Cladogram
                              hyperplasticgenerated
                                             polyps and  from LEfSe between samples from individuals diagnosed withfrom
                                                            conventional   adenomas     groups.   (D)  Cladogram     generated           LEfSe
                                                                                                                                    hyperplastic
                           between   samples   from    individuals  diagnosed    with  hyperplastic    polyps   or conventional
                              polyps or conventional adenomas. Yellow circles represent bacterial taxa that show no significant    adenomas.
                           Yellow  circles represent
                              differences   between bacterial
                                                        groups, taxa
                                                                 and that  show
                                                                       green  andnoredsignificant
                                                                                         circles represent      between
                                                                                                   differencestaxa   whose groups,   and green
                                                                                                                              abundances     were
                              significantly
                           and red           differential
                                    circles represent      between
                                                         taxa whose groups.
                                                                      abundances were significantly differential between groups.

                              3.2.3. Shifts in the Microbiota of Individuals with Hyperplastic Polyps
                                   To identify changes that specifically affected the microbiota of individuals with
                              hyperplastic polyps, we compared their fecal microbiota with that from the control group
                              (Figure 3). LEfSe analysis at the genus level revealed a differentially higher abundance of
                                                             Ruminococcus_torques in the feces of individuals with hyperplastic polyps as compared to
                                                             the controls (Figure 3A). The corresponding cladogram also showed a differentially
                                                             higher abundance of the family Eggerthellaceae and the order Coriobacteriales in the group
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                        with hyperplastic polyps (Figure 3B).
                                                                                                                                               9 of 18




                                   Figure 3. Differences in fecal microbiota compositions from individuals diagnosed with hyperplastic
                                   polyps compared to control samples. (A) Microbial taxa (at the genus taxonomic level) showing
                                   differential abundancesFigure   3.
                                                            according Differences
                                                                          to linearin   fecalsize
                                                                                     effect    microbiota   compositions
                                                                                                  discriminant    analysisfrom
                                                                                                                            (LEfSe)    for the diagnosed
                                                                                                                                  individuals   comparison   with
                                                          hyperplastic polyps compared to control samples. (A) Microbial taxa (at the genus taxonomic level)
                                   of samples from individuals      diagnosed     with   hyperplastic     polyps    and  individuals     from    the  control
                                                          showing differential abundances according to linear effect size discriminant analysis (LEfSe) for the
                                   group. (B) Cladogramcomparison
                                                            generated  of from
                                                                          samplesLEfSe    between diagnosed
                                                                                   from individuals  samples withfromhyperplastic
                                                                                                                       individuals      with
                                                                                                                                   polyps     hyperplastic
                                                                                                                                           and individuals   from
                                   polyps and the controlthe  control
                                                           group.      group. (B)
                                                                    Yellow        Cladogram
                                                                              circles represent generated from
                                                                                                   bacterial    LEfSe
                                                                                                              taxa    betweenno
                                                                                                                    showing     samples  from individuals
                                                                                                                                   significant   differences with
                        Cancers 2024, 16, 104             hyperplastic polyps and the control group. Yellow circles represent bacterial taxa showing 11 of 20 no
                                   between groups, and red     circles
                                                          significant    represent
                                                                      differences     taxa that
                                                                                  between  groups,were   significantly
                                                                                                    and red circles      more
                                                                                                                    represent    abundant
                                                                                                                              taxa that were in the    group
                                                                                                                                              significantly more
                                   with hyperplastic polyps.
                                                          abundant in the group with hyperplastic polyps.

                                                             3.2.4. Shifts in the Microbiota of Individuals with Conventional Adenomas
                                                                  The fecal microbiota of individuals diagnosed with conventional adenomas were
                                                             compared with the microbiota of the control group. We further compared the microbiota
                                                             from individuals without intestinal mucosal lesions and the microbiota from those
                                                             presenting conventional adenomas with different grades of dysplasia (LGD and HGD).
                                                             LEfSe analysis showed a differential enrichment of the Ruminococcus_torques and
                                                             Ruminococcus_gnavus groups in patients with conventional adenomas (Figure 4A,B). In
                                                             contrast, a differential depletion of the following taxa was also found in these individuals:
                                                             genus Methanobrevibacter/family Methanobacteriaceae/order Methanobacteriales; genus
                                                             Holdemanella/family Erysipelotrichaceae; genus Christensenellaceae R-7 group/family
                                                             Christensenellaceae/order Christensenellales; genus Clostridia_UCG-014 and its related upper
                                                             taxa; the Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1/family Clostridiaceae/order Clostridiales; genus
                                                             Ruminococcus, Oscillospiraceae_UCG-002, and Clostridium sp. CAG-352 within the order
                                                             Oscillospirales;     and       genus       Romboutsia/family       Peptostreptococcaceae/order
                                                             Peptostreptococcales_Tissierellales.




                                  Figure 4. Differences in fecal microbiota compositions from individuals diagnosed with conventional
                                  adenomas compared      with4.control
                                                     Figure               samples.
                                                                  Differences        (A) microbiota
                                                                               in fecal  Microbial compositions
                                                                                                      taxa (at the genus    taxonomicdiagnosed
                                                                                                                    from individuals     level) showing
                                                                                                                                                    with
                                                     conventional adenomas compared with control samples. (A) Microbial taxa (at the genus taxonomic
                                  differential abundance according to linear effect size discriminant analysis (LEfSe) for the comparison
                                                     level) showing differential abundance according to linear effect size discriminant analysis (LEfSe)
                                  of samples from for the
                                                    individuals     withof samples
                                                             comparison    conventional     adenomas
                                                                                     from individuals     and
                                                                                                       with    individuals
                                                                                                            conventional      fromand
                                                                                                                         adenomas    theindividuals
                                                                                                                                          control from
                                                                                                                                                   group.
                                  (B) Cladogram      the control
                                                  generated       group.
                                                               from       (B) between
                                                                      LEfSe   Cladogramsamples
                                                                                         generatedfrom
                                                                                                    from LEfSe  betweenwith
                                                                                                          individuals     samples from  individuals
                                                                                                                              conventional          with
                                                                                                                                               adenomas
                                                     conventional adenomas and the control group. Yellow circles represent bacterial taxa showing no
                                  and the control group.      Yellow    circles  represent   bacterial    taxa showing     no  significant   differences
                                                     significant differences between groups, and red circles represent taxa that were significantly more
                                  between groups, and     red in
                                                     abundant   circles  represent
                                                                   the group  with taxa    that were
                                                                                   conventional         significantly more abundant in the group
                                                                                                adenomas.
                                  with conventional adenomas.
                                                              The relative abundance of the phylum Euryarchaeota decreased abruptly in the feces
                                                         of individuals with conventional adenomas displaying HGD as compared to control
                                                         samples (Table S1). A consistent decrease (p < 0.05) related to the increase in the grade of
                                                         dysplasia was found for the families Methanobacteriaceae (2.11% in controls; 1.63% in LGD;
                                                         0.26% in HGD), Christensenellaceae (1.89% in controls; 1.11% in LGD; 1.00% in HGD), and
                                                         Erysipelotrichaceae (1.75% in controls; 0.99% in LGD; 1.00% in HGD) (Figure 5). Notably,
                                                         the families Oscillospiraceae, Clostridiaceae, and f_Clostridia_UCG-014 showed a significant
 Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                                         12 of 20




                          Christensenellaceae_R-7 group (Christensenellaceae), and genus Clostridia_UCG-014 (Table
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                      10 of 18
                          S2).




                           Figure5.5. Relative
                         Figure       Relative abundances
                                               abundances of of the
                                                                the main
                                                                     main microbial
                                                                            microbialfamilies
                                                                                       familiesaccording
                                                                                                accordingtotothe
                                                                                                               thegrade
                                                                                                                   gradeofofdysplasia
                                                                                                                             dysplasiain
                         inindividuals
                             individualswith
                                          withconventional
                                                conventionaladenomas.
                                                               adenomas.(*) (*)Statistically
                                                                               Statistically significant
                                                                                             significant differences
                                                                                                         differences between
                                                                                                                     between LGDLGDor or
                           HGDwith
                         HGD      withrespect to to
                                        respect  control are are
                                                    control  indicated  by linked
                                                                  indicated        upper-black
                                                                              by linked         bars
                                                                                           upper-black(Mann–Whitney
                                                                                                         bars          U test
                                                                                                               (Mann–Whitney  adjusted
                                                                                                                                 U  test
                         byadjusted by   Benjamini–Hochberg;
                              Benjamini–Hochberg;     p < 0.05). p <
                                                                 LGD:0.05). LGD: low-grade
                                                                       low-grade               dysplasia;
                                                                                    dysplasia; HGD:       HGD: high-grade
                                                                                                       high-grade  dysplasia.dysplasia.
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                                               11 of 18



                        3.3. Fecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids
                             As expected, acetic acid was the major fecal SCFA, followed by propionic and butyric
                        acid, in the two diagnosis groups: the control and polyps (Table S3). Isobutyric, isovaleric,
                        valeric, and caproic acids were present in considerably low proportions. Decreased levels of
                        caproic acid in the polyps group with respect to the control group was the only statistically
                        significant difference found when the SCFA levels were compared according to diagnosis
                        groups. Using histopathological examination as the classification criteria, significantly
                        lower fecal levels of caproic acid were found in samples from individuals with hyperplastic
                        polyps and conventional adenomas when compared with samples from the control group
                        (Table 2).

                        Table 2. Fecal short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) concentrations (in mM) according to histopathological
                        groups.

                                                                                 Histopathological Groups
                                                                                    Hyperplastic Polyps              Conventional
                           Fecal SCFAs (mM)               Control (n = 20)
                                                                                         (n = 9)                   Adenomas (n = 25)
                               Acetic acid                  47.16 ± 22.35                37.98 ± 23.88                  49.86 ± 23.46
                             Propionic acid                 13.65 ± 8.08                  14.10 ± 7.94                  15.92 ± 8.42
                               Butyric acid                  13.16 ± 9.73                 9.38 ± 6.04                   11.48 ± 6.67
                             Isobutyric acid                 0.99 ± 1.11                  1.08 ± 1.29                    0.96 ± 1.01
                             Isovaleric acid                 2.15 ± 1.85                  2.06 ± 1.21                    2.18 ± 1.76
                               Valeric acid                  2.38 ± 1.77                  1.33 ± 0.37                    1.67 ± 1.01
                              Caproic acid                   0.80 ± 1.26                 0.17 ± 0.35 *                  0.23 ± 0.45 *
                        Values are presented in terms of mean ± standard deviation. (*) Statistically significant differences of hyperplastic
                        polyps or conventional adenomas compared to control group (Mann–Whitney U test; p < 0.05). SCFAs: short
                        chain fatty acids.


                              Correlations between the SCFAs and microbiota evidenced significant positive associ-
                        ations of the Lachnospiraceae family with the three major SCFAs and of the Coprobacillaceae
                        family with propionic and butyric acid. Negative associations were found between Oscil-
                        lospiraceae, Christensenellaceae, and Rikenellaceae and the major SCFAs (Figure 6). Significant
                        positive associations were found for Prevotellaceae, Oscillospiraceae, and Christensenellaceae
                        with caproic acid.
                              Therefore, to more precisely characterize those microbial families that are potential
                        predictors of the fecal levels of SCFAs, thereby avoiding possible confounding factors,
                        linear regression analyses were conducted through adjustment according to the diagnosis
                        and histopathological groups for those associations displaying significant correlations in
                        Figure 6 (Table 3). The Oscillospiraceae and Rikenellaceae families were negative predictors of
                        acetic, propionic, and butyric acid in several classification groups, whereas Coprobacillaceae
                        was a positive predictor of propionic acid in the control group and of propionic and butyric
                        acid in the group with conventional adenomas. Lachnospiraceae was directly associated
                        with acetic acid concentrations only in the control group. Enterobacteriaceae was directly
                        associated with the fecal levels of isobutyric and isovaleric acid in several diagnosis and
                        histopathological groups. The Oscillospiraceae family was associated with caproic acid in
                        the group with conventional adenomas with HGD.

                        Table 3. Results obtained from linear regression analyses identifying bacterial families as predictors
                        of SCFAs according to the diagnosis and histopathological groups of volunteers.

                           Diagnosis           Dependent
                                                                          Independent Variable                   R2          β          p
                            Group               Variable
                                               Acetic acid                    Lachnospiraceae                   0.301     0.581       0.007
                                                                              Oscillospiraceae                  0.434     −0.623      0.002
                             Control         Propionic acid
                                                                              Coprobacillaceae                  0.434     0.376       0.044
                                               Butyric acid                   Oscillospiraceae                  0.275     −0.560      0.010
    Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                                                12 of 18



                                Table 3. Cont.

                                   Diagnosis           Dependent
                                                                                 Independent Variable                 R2         β          p
                                    Group               Variable
                                                       Acetic acid                   Oscillospiraceae                0.240    −0.512      0.002
                                                     Propionic acid                   Rikenellaceae                  0.232    −0.505      0.002
                                     Polyps            Butyric acid                   Rikenellaceae                  0.145    −0.413      0.015
                                                     Isobutyric acid                Enterobacteriaceae               0.267    0.537       0.001
                                                     Isovaleric acid                 Lachnospiraceae                 0.115    −0.376      0.028
                                                     Propionic acid                   Rikenellaceae                  0.388    −0.681      0.043
                                  Hyperplastic         Butyric acid                  Oscillospiraceae                0.373    −0.672      0.047
                                    polyps           Isobutyric acid                Enterobacteriaceae               0.943    0.975       0.000
                                                     Isovaleric acid                Enterobacteriaceae               0.835    0.925       0.000
                                                       Acetic acid                   Rikenellaceae                   0.238    −0.519      0.008
                                  Conventional                                     Christensenellaceae               0.312    −0.423      0.022
                                                     Propionic acid
                                   adenomas                                         Coprobacillaceae                 0.312    0.367       0.044
                                                      Butyric acid                  Coprobacillaceae                 0.138    0.417       0.038
                                                       Acetic acid                   Rikenellaceae                   0.221    −0.512    0.021
                                   Low-grade                              Eubacterium coprostanoligenes group        0.494    −0.544    0.04
                                                     Propionic acid
Cancers 2024, 16, 104               dysplasia                                      Christensenellaceae               0.494    −0.457    0.013
                                                                                                                                  14 of 20
                                                     Isobutyric acid                Ruminococcaceae                  0.232    −0.522    0.018
                                   High-grade        Isobutyric acid                Enterobacteriaceae               0.706     0.883      0.047
                                    dysplasia         Caproic acid                   Oscillospiraceae                0.739     0.897      0.039
                                Linear regression analyses were adjusted according to diagnosis and histopathological groups. Only the variables
                                with p < 0.05 in each model are shown. R2 : coefficient of multiple determination; β: standardized regres-
                                sion coefficient.




                                Figure
                            Figure          6. Heatmap
                                       6. Heatmap        definedby
                                                       defined   by Spearman
                                                                     Spearman correlations
                                                                                correlationsininthe sample
                                                                                                  the samplepopulation  under
                                                                                                               population      studystudy
                                                                                                                            under      between
                                most      abundant    microbial families (relative abundance    ≥  1%) and  SCFAs.  The
                            between most abundant microbial families (relative abundance ≥ 1%) and SCFAs. The intensity  intensity of   redofand
                                blue blue
                            red and      colors   represents
                                               colors        the the
                                                      represents degree  of of
                                                                     degree positive  andand
                                                                                positive  negative
                                                                                             negativeassociations, respectively.
                                                                                                        associations,             (*)(*)p p<<0.05;
                                                                                                                      respectively.
                            0.05;(**)
                                   (**)p p<<0.01.
                                              0.01.

                                 Therefore, to more precisely characterize those microbial families that are potential
                            predictors of the fecal levels of SCFAs, thereby avoiding possible confounding factors,
                            linear regression analyses were conducted through adjustment according to the diagnosis
                            and histopathological groups for those associations displaying significant correlations in
                            Figure 6 (Table 3). The Oscillospiraceae and Rikenellaceae families were negative predictors
                            of acetic, propionic, and butyric acid in several classification groups, whereas
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                              13 of 18



                        4. Discussion
                              Gut microbiota composition is considered as one of the main factors influencing the
                        pathogenesis of CRC. Although alterations have been reported in the fecal microbiota
                        compositions of patients with CRC, the initial shifts in the microbiota associated with
                        early intestinal mucosa damage prior to CRC development are less known [23,24]. In
                        this study, changes to the intestinal microbiota at the initial stages of intestinal mucosal
                        damage were examined according to several criteria: diagnosis groups (control and polyps),
                        morphological type of polyp (hyperplastic vs. conventional adenoma), and grade of
                        dysplasia (low or high) in conventional adenomas.
                              In contrast to previous reports, no differences were found in the alpha and beta
                        diversity of fecal microbiota between the diagnosis groups. This discrepancy could be
                        due to the different stages of mucosal damage used for the analysis of the microbiota
                        compositions among studies [25–27].
                              The results of the present work indicate that specific and different microbial taxa from
                        the Bacillota and Euryarchaeota phyla were predominantly affected in the two diagnosis
                        groups: the control and polyps. Genera determining differences between the control and
                        polyps groups included Ruminococcus, g_Clostridia_UCG-014, the Christensenellaceae_R-7
                        group, and Methanobrevibacter, which were less abundant in individuals with polyps, and
                        the genera Eubacterium_hallii and Ruminococcus_torques, which were enriched in the polyps
                        group. The altered abundances of these microorganisms and/or some of the directly related
                        taxa have been reported previously with regard to CRC and preneoplastic stages in the
                        same direction found in the present work [24–27]. The family Christensenellaceae, which
                        was significantly less abundant in the polyps group, has been generally associated with
                        a positive impact on human health, as well as some members of the butyrate-producing
                        family Ruminococcaceae, which have a protective effect against the development of CRC that
                        is linked to the consumption of a high-fiber diet and consequent microbial colonic fermenta-
                        tion [28–30]. Regarding Oscillospiraceae, which also decreased in the polyps group, previous
                        studies have reported a higher abundance of this family in samples of healthy controls or
                        in samples from individuals at the initial stages of CRC as compared to individuals with
                        more advanced CRC [31,32]. Methanogenic archaea in the colon are mostly represented
                        by the genus Methanobrevibacter. These microorganisms are functionally associated with
                        the fermentation of dietary fibers through the use of hydrogen produced by saccharolytic
                        bacteria as an electron donor for reduction reactions to produce methane. This contributes
                        to maintain a beneficial circle that provides energy substrates to the host, enhances the
                        epithelial barrier, and protects against intestinal pathogens [33]. However, the imbalance of
                        methanogenic bacteria during dysbiosis, as evidenced in individuals with polyps in the
                        present work, is associated with several dysimmune conditions and CRC [34]. Under nor-
                        mal conditions, Eubacterium hallii contributes to the formation of butyrate and propionate
                        in the intestine and has also shown the ability to conjugate xenobiotic compounds such as
                        the heterocyclic amine 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP), thereby
                        contributing to their detoxification in the colon [35,36]. Moreover, Eubacterium hallii was
                        included in a panel of 10 species that were used for differentiating adenomas among CRC
                        patients [37].
                              Significant differences in the intestinal microbiota compositions have been obtained, thereby
                        affecting some important taxa from the Bacillota (including the families Erysipelotrichaceae,
                        Clostridiaceae, and Ruminococcaceae) and Bacteroidota phyla, between samples from individu-
                        als with hyperplastic polyps and those with conventional adenomas. Mori et al. recently
                        reported alterations in the bacterial communities belonging to the Firmicutes phylum (re-
                        named Bacillota) in patients with intestinal preneoplastic lesions, including samples from
                        the “adenoma-carcinoma” sequence and hyperplastic polyps [38]. The Erysipelotrichaceae
                        family has been considered as a possible indicator of the intermediate steps in the sequence
                        of preneoplastic intestinal mucosal lesions in sporadic carcinogenesis, and it has been
                        related to inflammatory processes of the gastrointestinal tract, as well as to host lipid
                        metabolism [17,38,39]. Among the families whose abundances were found to significantly
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                            14 of 18



                        reduced in individuals with conventional adenomas with respect to hyperplastic polyps,
                        Ruminococcaceae is of special relevance, as it is the sole family accounting for a relative
                        abundance over 10% [29].
                              The results obtained support recent studies pointing to some differences In the in-
                        testinal microbiota between the serrated and the conventional adenomatous pathways
                        of carcinogenesis [17,40]. Microbial taxa were found to be more altered in conventional
                        adenomas than in hyperplastic polyps. Remarkably, the Ruminococcus_torques group was
                        the only shared taxon that was differentially enriched in samples from individuals with
                        either hyperplastic polyps or conventional adenomas. Members of the Ruminococcus torques
                        group have been positively associated with proinflammatory diets and, as also occurs
                        with Ruminococcus gnavus (both were differentially enriched in the group with conven-
                        tional adenomas), were found to be increased in several inflammatory processes and
                        diseases [41–43]. Ruminococcus torques has been recently identified as a “driver” in the
                        initiation and progression of the cancerous process [44].
                              When the fecal microbiota of individuals with LGD and HGD conventional adenomas
                        were compared, a reduction in the relative abundances of the Christensenellaceae, Methanobac-
                        teriaceae, and Erysipelotrichaceae families was obtained as related to the increase in the grade
                        of dysplasia. Mori et al. proposed the Lachnospiraceae and Erysipelotrichaceae families and
                        members of the phylum Actinomycetota as markers of the gut microbiota of healthy indi-
                        viduals and those with low-risk intestinal polyps [38]. The family Prevotellaceae was also
                        decreased in individuals with HGD conventional adenomas compared to the control sam-
                        ples. These microorganisms have been positively associated with anti-inflammatory diets
                        characterized by a high consumption of vegetables and a reduced risk of CRC; however,
                        they have also been found to be increased in the microbiota of individuals with CRC in
                        several studies [45–47]. Streptococcaceae, which were also decreased in HGD individuals,
                        are carbohydrate-fermentative and organic acid-producing microorganisms that are com-
                        mensal inhabitants of the oral cavity and gut; they contribute to immune homeostasis,
                        although some species are pathogenic and have been related to oral disease and CRC [48].
                        In the present study, the significant decrease in some relevant families of carbohydrate-
                        fermentative microorganisms in the gut (Christensenellaceae, Clostridiaceae, Erysipelotrichaceae,
                        Streptococcaceae, and Prevotellaceae), together with the decrease in methanogenic archaea,
                        could reflect a progressive alteration of the gut microbial consortia participating in fermen-
                        tative processes.
                              In short, the work performed evidenced deeper changes in the fecal microbiota compo-
                        sitions of individuals with conventional adenomas than in those with hyperplastic polyps.
                        The increased abundance of the Ruminococcus_torques group was a differential signature of
                        the microbiota compositions of individuals with polyps, with either conventional adenomas
                        or hyperplastic polyps. The evolution of certain taxonomic groups was different for both
                        types of alterations, and the decrease in specific microbial families as related to the grade of
                        dysplasia in conventional adenomas was of relevance.
                              Despite the fact that some microbial families were associated with the fecal levels of
                        SCFAs, no significant variations in the fecal concentrations of the major SCFAs were found,
                        which suggests that although important shifts occur in the fermentative gut microbial
                        consortia alongside the progression of intestinal mucosal lesions, they do not globally affect
                        SCFA concentrations. Nevertheless, the relatively small sample size may be influencing the
                        lack of significant differences in this regard. The decrease in the fecal levels of caproic acid
                        in individuals with conventional adenomas with HGD was associated with the decrease in
                        Oscillospiraceae amounts in this histopathological group. Caproic acid is mostly derived
                        from diet and can participate in the enhancement of Th1 and Th17 cell differentiation in the
                        immune system [49]. However, the reduced concentration of this compound in feces and the
                        lack of sufficient data preclude our formulating any hypothesis. Alterations to the intestinal
                        microbiota associated with intestinal mucosa damage could be also related to shifts in
                        the concentrations of a variety of metabolites, other than SCFAs, such as those derived
                        from the metabolism of dietary phenolic compounds, amino acids, lipids, nucleotides, and
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                                    15 of 18



                        xenobiotics. Metabolomic studies will help to identify the metabolic changes associated
                        with altered microbiota profiles and damage of the intestinal mucosa.
                             We have recently reported altered levels of Lachnospiraceae and Eggerthellaceae, as
                        well as of the Muribaculaceae, Streptococcaceae and Eubacterium coprostanoligenes groups, in a
                        collective of socially vulnerable individuals associated with the consumption of 2-amino-3,8-
                        dimethylimidazo [4,5-f]quinoxaline (MeIQx) and PhIP, which are two heterocyclic amines
                        formed during food cooking [50]. Therefore, although a causality cannot be established,
                        these preliminary data may suggest a possible relationship between initial alterations to
                        the intestinal mucosa derived from toxic dietary compounds and gut intestinal micro-
                        biota profiles.

                        5. Conclusions
                              The comparison between control and polyps groups and the differences found exam-
                        ining the histopathological features, together with the grade of dysplasia in stages prior
                        to CRC development, revealed important shifts in fecal microbiota profiles; some of the
                        relevant taxa compositions that were altered are microorganisms that are normally involved
                        in fermentative processes in the intestine.
                              The present work could provide a starting point for wider studies focused on the
                        possible influence regarding modification of diet and lifestyle on the initial stages of
                        intestinal alterations that could potentially trigger the CRC process and other diseases.

                        Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at https:
                        //www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/cancers16010104/s1. Table S1: Differences in the relative abun-
                        dances of microbial phyla in fecal samples from individuals with conventional adenomas according
                        to the grade of dysplasia; Table S2: Differences in the relative abundances of microbial genera, ranked
                        according to their taxonomic family membership, in fecal samples from individuals with conven-
                        tional adenomas according to the grade of dysplasia; Table S3: Fecal short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)
                        concentrations (mM) according to diagnosis groups.
                        Author Contributions: Conceptualization: C.G.d.l.R.-G. and S.G.; Methodology: S.R.-S., A.S., C.G.d.R.
                        and Y.D.; Validation: N.S. and S.A.; Formal analysis: S.R.-S., A.M.N. and S.A.; Investigation: S.R.-S.,
                        S.A., A.M.N., N.S., C.G.d.R., M.G., S.G. and C.G.d.l.R.-G.; Data curation: S.R.-S. and A.M.N.; Funding
                        acquisition: C.G.d.l.R.-G. and S.G.; Writing—original draft: C.G.d.l.R.-G. and S.R.-S.; Writing—review
                        and editing: S.R.-S., C.G.d.l.R.-G. and S.G. All authors have read and agreed to the published version
                        of the manuscript.
                        Funding: The data used in this study have been obtained from the project “Effect of Diet and exposure
                        to XEnobiotics generated during food processing on the genotoxic/cytotoxic capacity of the intestinal
                        MIcrobiota” (MIXED), reference RTI2018-098288-B-I00, which is financed by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/
                        501100011033/FEDER, “Una manera de hacer Europa”, through the project AYUD/2021/50981 from
                        the Principality of Asturias, to support the activity of research groups. The project is also financed by
                        the Grant PID2022-140410OB-I00, which is funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by
                        “ERDF A way of making Europe”. S.R.-S. was the recipient of a predoctoral contract (Severo Ochoa
                        2021-BP20-012) funded by the Plan Regional de Investigación Principality of Asturias. N.S. received the
                        research contract Grant RYC2021-033521-I, which is funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and
                        the European Union NextGenerationEU/PRTR. S.A. was the recipient of an Instituto de Investigación
                        Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA) R2 Senior Postdoctoral Researcher Contract (ITM-Junior-
                        22), and A.N. received an intramural postdoctoral research contract (2021), both of which were
                        financed by the Fundación para la Investigación Biosanitaria of Asturias (FINBA).
                        Institutional Review Board Statement: This project was evaluated and approved by the Regional
                        Ethics Committee of Clinical Research of Asturias (Ref. 163/19) and by the Committee on Bioethics of
                        CSIC (Ref. 174/2020). The procedures were performed in accordance with the fundamental principles
                        set out in the Declaration of Helsinki, the Oviedo Bioethics Convention, and the Council of Europe
                        Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, as well as in accordance with Spanish legislation
                        on bioethics. Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of 24 October 1995,
                        regarding the protection of individuals with respect to the processing of personal data and the free
                        movement of such data, was strictly followed.
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                                                   16 of 18



                                    Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
                                    Data Availability Statement: The datasets generated during metagenomic sequencing of fecal DNA
                                    samples were deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive PRJNA994445 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.
                                    nih.gov/bioproject/994445).
                                   Acknowledgments: We are indebted to all the patients who have participated in the study, to the
                                   nurses at the Digestive Services of the HUCA, Carmen, and Severo Ochoa Hospitals in Asturias,
                                   Northern Spain, and to the personnel of the scientific–technical services at IPLA-CSIC for performing
                                   SCFA analyses.
                                    Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
1.    Laconi, E.; Marongiu, F.; DeGregori, J. Cancer as a Disease of Old Age: Changing Mutational and Microenvironmental Landscapes.
      Br. J. Cancer 2020, 122, 943–952. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Nguyen, L.H.; Goel, A.; Chung, D.C. Pathways of Colorectal Carcinogenesis. Gastroenterology 2020, 158, 291–302. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
3.    Sung, H.; Ferlay, J.; Siegel, R.L.; Laversanne, M.; Soerjomataram, I.; Jemal, A.; Bray, F. Global Cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN
      Estimates of Incidence and Mortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries. CA. Cancer J. Clin. 2021, 71, 209–249. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
4.    Jakszyn, P.; Cayssials, V.; Buckland, G.; Perez-Cornago, A.; Weiderpass, E.; Boeing, H.; Bergmann, M.M.; Vulcan, A.; Ohlsson, B.;
      Masala, G.; et al. Inflammatory Potential of the Diet and Risk of Colorectal Cancer in the European Prospective Investigation into
      Cancer and Nutrition Study. Int. J. Cancer 2020, 147, 1027–1039. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.    Rawla, P.; Sunkara, T.; Barsouk, A. Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer: Incidence, Mortality, Survival, and Risk Factors.
      Gastroenterol. Rev. Gastroenterol. 2019, 14, 89–103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Wu, S.; Powers, S.; Zhu, W.; Hannun, Y.A. Substantial Contribution of Extrinsic Risk Factors to Cancer Development. Nature 2015,
      529, 43–47. [CrossRef]
7.    Snover, D.C. Diagnostic and Reporting Issues of Preneoplastic Polyps of the Large Intestine with Early Carcinoma. Ann. Diagn.
      Pathol. 2019, 39, 1–14. [CrossRef]
8.    Vennelaganti, S.; Cuatrecasas, M.; Vennalaganti, P.; Kennedy, K.F.; Srinivasan, S.; Patil, D.T.; Plesec, T.; Lanas, A.; Hörndler, C.;
      Andraws, N.; et al. Interobserver Agreement Among Pathologists in the Differentiation of Sessile Serrated from Hyperplastic
      Polyps. Gastroenterology 2021, 160, 452–454. [CrossRef]
9.    Sanabria, M.C.; Umaña, A.; Serrano, M.L.; Sánchez, M.; Mesa, J.; Hernández, G.A. Vías de Carcinogénesis Colorrectal y Sus
      Implicaciones Clínicas. [Pathways of Colorectal Carcinogenesis and Their Clinical Implications]. Rev. Colomb. Cancerol. 2012, 16,
      170–181. [CrossRef]
10.   Rex, D.K.; Ahnen, D.J.; Baron, J.A.; Batts, K.P.; Burke, C.A.; Burt, R.W.; Goldblum, J.R.; Guillem, J.G.; Kahi, C.J.; Kalady, M.F.;
      et al. Serrated Lesions of the Colorectum: Review and Recommendations from an Expert Panel. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2012, 107,
      1315–1329. [CrossRef]
11.   Chang, J.J.; Chien, C.H.; Chen, S.W.; Chen, L.W.; Liu, C.J.; Yen, C.L. Long Term Outcomes of Colon Polyps with High Grade
      Dysplasia Following Endoscopic Resection. BMC Gastroenterol. 2020, 20, 376. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Cronin, P.; Joyce, S.A.; O’toole, P.W.; O’connor, E.M. Dietary Fibre Modulates the Gut Microbiota. Nutrients 2021, 13, 1655.
      [CrossRef]
13.   O’Keefe, S.J.D. Diet, Microorganisms and Their Metabolites, and Colon Cancer. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2016, 13, 691–706.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Portune, K.J.; Beaumont, M.; Davila, A.-M.; Tomé, D.; Blachier, F.; Sanz, Y. Gut Microbiota Role in Dietary Protein Metabolism
      and Health-Related Outcomes: The Two Sides of the Coin. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2016, 57, 213–232. [CrossRef]
15.   Nogacka, A.M.; Gómez-Martín, M.; Suárez, A.; González-Bernardo, O.; de los Reyes-Gavilán, C.G.; González, S. Xenobiotics
      Formed during Food Processing: Their Relation with the Intestinal Microbiota and Colorectal Cancer. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019,
      20, 2051. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.   Tjalsma, H.; Boleij, A.; Marchesi, J.R.; Dutilh, B.E. A Bacterial Driver–Passenger Model for Colorectal Cancer: Beyond the Usual
      Suspects. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2012, 10, 575–582. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.   Peters, B.A.; Dominianni, C.; Shapiro, J.A.; Church, T.R.; Wu, J.; Miller, G.; Yuen, E.; Freiman, H.; Lustbader, I.; Salik, J.; et al. The
      Gut Microbiota in Conventional and Serrated Precursors of Colorectal Cancer. Microbiome 2016, 4, 69. [CrossRef]
18.   Rezasoltani, S.; Ghanbari, R.; Looha, M.A.; Mojarad, E.N.; Yadegar, A.; Stewart, D.; Aghdaei, H.A.; Zali, M.R. Expression of Main
      Toll-Like Receptors in Patients with Different Types of Colorectal Polyps and Their Relationship with Gut Microbiota. Int. J. Mol.
      Sci. 2020, 21, 8968. [CrossRef]
19.   Ruiz-Saavedra, S.; Zapico, A.; del Rey, C.G.; Gonzalez, C.; Suárez, A.; Díaz, Y.; de los Reyes-Gavilán, C.G.; González, S. Dietary
      Xenobiotics Derived from Food Processing: Association with Fecal Mutagenicity and Gut Mucosal Damage. Nutrients 2022,
      14, 3482. [CrossRef]
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                                                   17 of 18



20.   International Human Microbiome Standards (IHMS). IHMS_SOP 06 V2: Standard Operating Procedure for Fecal Samples DNA
      Extraction, Protocol Q. Available online: https://brd.nci.nih.gov/brd/sop/download-pdf/2105 (accessed on 27 October 2023).
21.   Nogacka, A.M.; Salazar, N.; Arboleya, S.; Ruas-Madiedo, P.; Mancabelli, L.; Suarez, A.; Martinez-Faedo, C.; Ventura, M.; Tochio,
      T.; Hirano, K.; et al. In Vitro Evaluation of Different Prebiotics on the Modulation of Gut Microbiota Composition and Function in
      Morbid Obese and Normal-Weight Subjects. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 906. [CrossRef]
22.   Segata, N.; Izard, J.; Waldron, L.; Gevers, D.; Miropolsky, L.; Garrett, W.S.; Huttenhower, C. Metagenomic Biomarker Discovery
      and Explanation. Genome Biol. 2011, 12, R60. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.   Yachida, S.; Mizutani, S.; Shiroma, H.; Shiba, S.; Nakajima, T.; Sakamoto, T.; Watanabe, H.; Masuda, K.; Nishimoto, Y.; Kubo, M.;
      et al. Metagenomic and Metabolomic Analyses Reveal Distinct Stage-Specific Phenotypes of the Gut Microbiota in Colorectal
      Cancer. Nat. Med. 2019, 25, 968–976. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Aprile, F.; Bruno, G.; Palma, R.; Mascellino, M.T.; Panetta, C.; Scalese, G.; Oliva, A.; Severi, C.; Pontone, S. Microbiota Alterations
      in Precancerous Colon Lesions: A Systematic Review. Cancers 2021, 13, 3061. [CrossRef]
25.   Yang, Y.; Misra, B.B.; Liang, L.; Bi, D.; Weng, W.; Wu, W.; Cai, S.; Qin, H.; Goel, A.; Li, X.; et al. Integrated Microbiome and
      Metabolome Analysis Reveals a Novel Interplay between Commensal Bacteria and Metabolites in Colorectal Cancer. Theranostics
      2019, 9, 4101–4114. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.   Kong, C.; Liang, L.; Liu, G.; Du, L.; Yang, Y.; Liu, J.; Shi, D.; Li, X.; Ma, Y. Integrated Metagenomic and Metabolomic Analysis
      Reveals Distinct Gut-Microbiome-Derived Phenotypes in Early-Onset Colorectal Cancer. Gut 2023, 72, 1129–1142. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
27.   Du, X.; Li, Q.; Tang, Z.; Yan, L.; Zhang, L.; Zheng, Q.; Zeng, X.; Chen, G.; Yue, H.; Li, J.; et al. Alterations of the Gut Microbiome
      and Fecal Metabolome in Colorectal Cancer: Implication of Intestinal Metabolism for Tumorigenesis. Front. Physiol. 2022, 13,
      854545. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.   Waters, J.L.; Ley, R.E. The Human Gut Bacteria Christensenellaceae Are Widespread, Heritable, and Associated with Health.
      BMC Biol. 2019, 17, 83. [CrossRef]
29.   Chen, J.; Vitetta, L. Inflammation-Modulating Effect of Butyrate in the Prevention of Colon Cancer by Dietary Fiber. Clin. Color.
      Cancer 2018, 17, e541–e544. [CrossRef]
30.   Gheorghe, A.S.; Negru, ,S.M.; Preda, M.; Mihăilă, R.I.; Komporaly, I.A.; Dumitrescu, E.A.; Lungulescu, C.V.; Kajanto, L.A.;
      Georgescu, B.; Radu, E.A.; et al. Biochemical and Metabolical Pathways Associated with Microbiota-Derived Butyrate in
      Colorectal Cancer and Omega-3 Fatty Acids Implications: A Narrative Review. Nutrients 2022, 14, 1152. [CrossRef]
31.   Qi, Z.; Zhibo, Z.; Jing, Z.; Zhanbo, Q.; Shugao, H.; Weili, J.; Jiang, L.; Shuwen, H. Prediction Model of Poorly Differentiated
      Colorectal Cancer (CRC) Based on Gut Bacteria. BMC Microbiol. 2022, 22, 312. [CrossRef]
32.   Fan, J.Q.; Zhao, W.F.; Lu, Q.W.; Zha, F.R.; Lv, L.B.; Ye, G.L.; Gao, H.L. Fecal Microbial Biomarkers Combined with Multi-target
      Stool DNA Test Improve Diagnostic Accuracy for Colorectal Cancer. World J. Gastrointest. Oncol. 2023, 15, 1424–1435. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
33.   Sereme, Y.; Mezouar, S.; Grine, G.; Mege, J.L.; Drancourt, M.; Corbeau, P.; Vitte, J. Methanogenic Archaea: Emerging Partners in
      the Field of Allergic Diseases. Clin. Rev. Allergy Immunol. 2019, 57, 456–466. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.   Guindo, C.O.; Drancourt, M.; Grine, G. Digestive Tract Methanodrome: Physiological Roles of Human Microbiota-Associated
      Methanogens. Microb. Pathog. 2020, 149, 104425. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.   Engels, C.; Ruscheweyh, H.J.; Beerenwinkel, N.; Lacroix, C.; Schwab, C. The Common Gut Microbe Eubacterium hallii also
      Contributes to Intestinal Propionate Formation. Front. Microbiol. 2016, 7, 713. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.   Fekry, M.I.; Engels, C.; Zhang, J.; Schwab, C.; Lacroix, C.; Sturla, S.J.; Chassard, C. The Strict Anaerobic Gut Microbe Eubacterium
      hallii Transforms the Carcinogenic Dietary Heterocyclic Amine 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP). Environ.
      Microbiol. Rep. 2016, 8, 201–209. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.   Lin, C.; Li, B.; Tu, C.; Chen, X.; Guo, M. Correlations between Intestinal Microbiota and Clinical Characteristics in Colorectal
      Adenoma/Carcinoma. Biomed. Res. Int. 2022, 2022, 3140070. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.   Mori, G.; Rampelli, S.; Orena, B.S.; Rengucci, C.; De Maio, G.; Barbieri, G.; Passardi, A.; Casadei Gardini, A.; Frassineti, G.L.;
      Gaiarsa, S.; et al. Shifts of Faecal Microbiota During Sporadic Colorectal Carcinogenesis. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 10329. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
39.   Kaakoush, N.O. Insights into the Role of Erysipelotrichaceae in the Human Host. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2015, 5, 84.
      [CrossRef]
40.   Yoon, H.; Kim, N.; Park, J.H.; Kim, Y.S.; Lee, J.; Kim, H.W.; Choi, Y.J.; Shin, C.M.; Park, Y.S.; Lee, D.H.; et al. Comparisons of Gut
      Microbiota Among Healthy Control, Patients with Conventional Adenoma, Sessile Serrated Adenoma, and Colorectal Cancer. J.
      Cancer Prev. 2017, 22, 108–114. [CrossRef]
41.   Zheng, J.; Hoffman, K.L.; Chen, J.-S.; Shivappa, N.; Sood, A.; Browman, G.J.; Dirba, D.D.; Hanash, S.; Wei, P.; Hebert, J.R.; et al.
      Dietary Inflammatory Potential in Relation to the Gut Microbiome: Results from a Cross-Sectional Study. Br. J. Nutr. 2020, 124,
      931–942. [CrossRef]
42.   Yan, H.; Qin, Q.; Chen, J.; Yan, S.; Li, T.; Gao, X.; Yang, Y.; Li, A.; Ding, S. Gut Microbiome Alterations in Patients with Visceral
      Obesity Based on Quantitative Computed Tomography. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2022, 11, 823262. [CrossRef]
43.   Dong, Y.; Xu, R.; Chen, X.; Yang, C.; Jiang, F.; Shen, Y.; Li, Q.; Fang, F.; Li, Y.; Shen, X. Characterization of Gut Microbiota in Adults
      with Coronary Atherosclerosis. PeerJ 2023, 11, e15245. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cancers 2024, 16, 104                                                                                                               18 of 18



44.   Cai, P.; Xiong, J.; Sha, H.; Dai, X.; Lu, J. Tumor Bacterial Markers Diagnose the Initiation and Four Stages of Colorectal Cancer.
      Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2023, 13, 1123544. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.   Ahmad Kendong, S.M.; Raja Ali, R.A.; Nawawi, K.N.M.; Ahmad, H.F.; Mokhtar, N.M. Gut Dysbiosis and Intestinal Barrier
      Dysfunction: Potential Explanation for Early-Onset Colorectal Cancer. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2021, 11, 1244. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
46.   Sheng, Q.; Du, H.; Cheng, X.; Cheng, X.; Tang, Y.; Pan, L.; Wang, Q.; Lin, J. Characteristics of Fecal Gut Microbiota in Patients with
      Colorectal Cancer at Different Stages and Different Sites. Oncol. Lett. 2019, 18, 4834–4844. [CrossRef]
47.   DeDecker, L.; Coppedge, B.; Avelar-Barragan, J.; Karnes, W.; Whiteson, K. Microbiome Distinctions between the CRC Carcinogenic
      Pathways. Gut Microbes 2021, 13, 1854641. [CrossRef]
48.   Mailhe, M.; Ricaboni, D.; Vitton, V.; Gonzalez, J.-M.; Bachar, D.; Dubourg, G.; Cadoret, F.; Robert, C.; Delerce, J.; Levasseur,
      A.; et al. Repertoire of the Gut Microbiota from Stomach to Colon Using Culturomics and Next-Generation Sequencing. BMC
      Microbiol. 2018, 18, 157. [CrossRef]
49.   Saresella, M.; Marventano, I.; Barone, M.; La Rosa, F.; Piancone, F.; Mendozzi, L.; d’Arma, A.; Rossi, V.; Pugnetti, L.; Roda, G.;
      et al. Alterations in Circulating Fatty Acid Are Associated with Gut Microbiota Dysbiosis and Inflammation in Multiple Sclerosis.
      Front. Immunol. 2020, 11, 1390. [CrossRef]
50.   Zapico, A.; Arboleya, S.; Ruiz-Saavedra, S.; Gómez-Martín, M.; Salazar, N.; Nogacka, A.M.; Gueimonde, M.; de los Reyes-Gavilán,
      C.G.; González, S. Dietary Xenobiotics, (Poly)Phenols and Fibers: Exploring Associations with Gut Microbiota in Socially
      Vulnerable Individuals. Front. Nutr. 2022, 9, 1000829. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
