              microorganisms

Article
Mucosal Microbiota from Colorectal Cancer, Adenoma and Normal
Epithelium Reveals the Imprint of Fusobacterium nucleatum
in Cancerogenesis
Orazio Palmieri 1, *,† , Stefano Castellana 2,† , Anna Latiano 1 , Tiziana Latiano 1 , Annamaria Gentile 1 , Anna Panza 1 ,
Marianna Nardella 1 , Davide Ciardiello 3,4 , Tiziana Pia Latiano 3 , Giuseppe Corritore 1 , Tommaso Mazza 2 ,
Francesco Perri 1,‡ and Giuseppe Biscaglia 1,‡

                                           1   Division of Gastroenterology and Endoscopy, Fondazione IRCCS “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza”,
                                               71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy
                                           2   Unit of Bioinformatics, Fondazione IRCCS “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza”, 71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy
                                           3   Division of Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza”, 71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy
                                           4   Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli,
                                               80131 Naples, Italy
                                           *   Correspondence: o.palmieri@operapadrepio.it
                                           †   These authors contributed equally to this work.
                                           ‡   These authors also contributed equally to this work.


                                           Abstract: An increasing amount of evidence suggests the emerging role of the gut microbiota in the
                                           development of colorectal cancer (CRC). This study aimed to elucidate the architecture of microbial
                                           communities within normal and neoplastic colonic mucosa. Methods: Microbiota were analyzed by
                                           NGS and by an ensemble of metagenomics analysis tools in a total of 69 tissues from 9 patients with
                                           synchronous colorectal neoplasia and adenomas (27 specimens: 9 from normal tissues, 9 adenomas,
                                           and 9 tumours), 16 patients with only colonic adenomas (32 specimens: 16 from normal tissues
Citation: Palmieri, O.; Castellana, S.;    and 16 adenomas), and from healthy subjects (10 specimens of normal mucosa). Results: Weak
Latiano, A.; Latiano, T.; Gentile, A.;     differences were observed in alpha and beta metrics among the synchronous tissues from CRC and
Panza, A.; Nardella, M.; Ciardiello,
                                           controls. Through pairwise differential abundance analyses of sample groups, an increasing trend of
D.; Latiano, T.P.; Corritore, G.; et al.
                                           Rikenellaceae, Pseudomonas and Fusobacterium, and decreasing trends of Staphylococcus, Actinobacillus
Mucosal Microbiota from Colorectal
                                           and Gemmiger were observed in CRC, while Staphylococcus and Bifidobacterium were decreased in
Cancer, Adenoma and Normal
                                           patients with only adenomas. At RT-qPCR analysis, Fusobacterium nucleatum was significantly
Epithelium Reveals the Imprint of
Fusobacterium nucleatum in
                                           enriched in all the tissues of subjects with synchronous colorectal neoplasia. Conclusion: Our
Cancerogenesis. Microorganisms 2023,       findings provide a comprehensive view of the human mucosa-associated gut microbiota, emphasizing
11, 1147. https://doi.org/10.3390/         global microbial diversity mostly in synchronous lesions and proving the constant presence of
microorganisms11051147                     Fusobacterium nucleatum, with its ability to drive carcinogenesis.

Academic Editors: Jean-Paul Motta
                                           Keywords: colorectal cancer; adenomas; microbiota; Fusobacterium nucleatum
and Shuo Wang

Received: 15 March 2023
Revised: 17 April 2023
Accepted: 25 April 2023                    1. Introduction
Published: 28 April 2023
                                                 Colorectal cancer (CRC) significantly contributes to the global health burden. In 2022,
                                           approximately 1.9 million new cases and 0.9 million deaths worldwide were reported [1].
                                           It is well known that carcinogenesis in the large bowel has a multifactorial etiology that
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
                                           includes genetic, environmental and lifestyle factors [2].
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.               Among the genetic factors, hereditary cancer syndromes, such as Lynch syndrome
This article is an open access article     (LS), or familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), are implicated in 5–10% of CRC cases [3].
distributed under the terms and            Approximately 25% of CRC cases have a family history of CRC with infrequent or unclear
conditions of the Creative Commons         genetic markers, while the remaining cases arise sporadically [3].
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://            The relatively high level of sporadic CRC reflects the importance of environmental
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/           factors, both exogenous and endogenous, that may contribute to carcinogenesis. It has been
4.0/).                                     hypothesized that one of the players is the microbial community living in the large bowel.



Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms11051147                           https://www.mdpi.com/journal/microorganisms
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                         2 of 14




                                In this milieu, the microbiota or the metabolites generated through microbial processes have
                                a profound effect on immune cells and their functional states [4], and could be proximate
                                environmental modifiers of risk for CRC.
                                     To date, the use of biomarkers has been limited. Universal screening for mismatch
                                repair proteins has been proposed to identify potential individuals with Lynch syndrome [5].
                                Metagenomic studies performed in the stool or in mucosal tissues revealed microbial
                                composition and ecological changes, providing evidence for the correlation between a
                                dysbiotic microbial community and CRC [6]. The fecal microbiota only partially reflect the
                                mucosal microbiota [7].
                                     Animal models allowed the identification of specific microbes associated with colonic
                                carcinogenesis. Among them are strains of Escherichia coli [8], Bacteroides fragilis [9] and
                                Fusobacterium nucleatum [10]. Among the microbes identified in the numerous studies
                                of patients with CRC, Fusobacterium nucleatum has emerged as strongly associated with
                                pathogenesis, progression, and treatment response in CRC [11].
                                     To highlight the impact of the overall architecture of microbial composition on the se-
                                quence adenoma–carcinoma, we imagined a model represented by subjects with coexisting
                                neoplastic tissue, adenoma tissue and normal tissue, and those with only adenomas.
                                     Therefore, we analyzed the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) microbiota by next generation
                                sequencing (NGS) from two groups of patients: subjects with synchronous carcinoma and
                                adenoma (biopsy pinched on neoplasms, on adenoma and adjacent normal tissue) and
                                subjects with only adenoma (biopsy pinched on adenoma and adjacent normal tissue). In
                                addition, using RT-qPCR, we focused on Fusobacterium nucleatum, known as a mutualist,
                                infectious agent, and oncogenic microorganism [12].

                                2. Materials and Methods
                                2.1. Clinical Samples
                                     A total of 69 biopsies from 25 patients and 10 healthy controls were prospectively
                                assessed at the Gastroenterology and Digestive Endoscopy Unit at Fondazione IRCCS-
                                Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital. Of these, 9/25 (36%) were CRC patients with
                                synchronous adenomas, while the remaining 16 had adenomas without neoplasia. For all
                                the patients the normal tissues were also collected. The specimens were collected during
                                the endoscopic examination and were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at
                                −80 ◦ C. Biopsy samples from 10 healthy controls were also collected. No inflammatory
                                polyps, hyperplastic polyps, non-advanced adenomas, or other intestinal diseases were
                                found during the colon examinations.
                                     The study was conducted following the Declaration of Helsinki, and the protocol was
                                approved by the Hospital’s Ethics Committee (Prot. N.132 CE/2015). Informed consent
                                was signed by all subjects. To limit the impact of genetics and drugs, subjects having an
                                antecedent diagnosis of inherited cancer syndrome, an age of CRC diagnosis under 50 years,
                                and treatment with antibiotics and/or chemotherapy within the past three months were
                                excluded. In addition, no dietary habits and overweight/obesity presence were recorded.

                                2.2. Laboratory Procedures
                                     DNA was extracted using the AllPrep Power viral DNA/RNA Kit (Qiagen, Hilden,
                                Germany), following the manufacturer’s recommendations. The gentleMACS Dissociator
                                (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch-Gladbach, Germany) was used for the homogenization step
                                of the tissue samples. DNA quantity was examined using a NanoDrop ND-1000 spec-
                                trophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc. Somerset, NJ, USA). Microbial diversity in
                                the mucosal specimens was studied by sequencing the amplified V3 to V4 hypervariable
                                region of the 16S rRNA gene. PCR primers and conditions followed the Illumina 16S
                                Metagenomic Sequencing Library preparation guide (Part # 15.044.223 Rev.B) [13] with the
                                following exceptions: for the first 16S PCR the process was performed using Taq Phusion
                                High-Fidelity (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) in 25 µL reaction volumes,
                                and 25 cycles were used in the PCR. A PCR negative control, consisting of PCR-grade water,
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                         3 of 14




                                was systematically added to each PCR run. Amplicons were detected using 2% agarose
                                gel electrophoresis using 1 µg/mL ethidium bromide in the presence of a 1 kb ladder as a
                                marker in the first line.
                                      Subsequently, amplicons of about 550 bp were considered positive and were pu-
                                rified using AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter, Milan, Italy). Afterwards, the lig-
                                ation of the dual indexing adapters was performed in the presence of Nextera XT In-
                                dex Primer 1 and Primer 2 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), Taq Phusion High-Fidelity
                                (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 5 µL purified DNA, according to the manufacturer’s
                                instructions. The products were purified using AMPure XP beads to create the final
                                DNA library. The libraries’ concentration and fragment size were measured using a
                                fluorometric-based system (Qubit dsDNA BR Assay System; Thermo Fisher Scientific)
                                and the Agilent 2200 TapeStation Bioanalyzer (HS D1000 ScreenTape Assays; Agilent
                                Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), respectively. Equal amounts of DNA libraries
                                were pooled, denatured with NaOH, diluted with hybridization buffer to 7 pM follow-
                                ing the Illumina protocol, and spiked with 20% PhiX (Illumina). The libraries were
                                loaded into a flow cell V2 (500 cycles) by paired-end sequencing (2 × 250) (Illumina)
                                and sequenced with MiSeq sequencing instrument System (Illumina) according to the
                                manufacturer’s recommendations.

                                2.3. Quantitative Real-Time PCR (RT-qPCR)
                                     The RT-qPCR experiment was performed using the Microbial DNA qPCR Assay Kit
                                (Qiagen) which is based on the detection of bacterial species targeting the 16s rRNA gene
                                conserved across a wide variety of microorganisms. An aliquot (0.3 µL) of mucosal DNA
                                dilution was used in a 10 µL reaction mixture, containing 5 µL of Microbial qPCR Mastermix
                                and 0.4 µL Microbial DNA qPCR Assay. For each sample, different reactions were carried
                                out: a Fusobacterium nucleatum assay (BPID00160A), a Positive PCR Control (PPC) reaction,
                                and a Pan Bacteria 1 reaction. The cycling conditions were: denaturation (95 ◦ C for 10 min)
                                followed by 40 cycles of amplification (95 ◦ C for 15 s and 60 ◦ C for 2 min) using ABI
                                7900 HT (ThermoFisher Scientific). The results were evaluated by SDS version 2.4 software
                                and qPCR data were analyzed using the 2∧−(delta Ct) method.

                                2.4. Bioinformatics and Statistical Data Analysis
                                      The quality of sequencing output was primarily inspected by FastQC application; then,
                                sample reads were demultiplexed and analyzed using the QIIME2 v.2021.11 suite [14]. The
                                initial steps, which included read quality checking and filtering, de-replication, chimeric
                                reads identification, paired-end reads joining, and sequence clustering, were performed
                                using the DADA2 [15] plugin and a raw feature table was generated. The taxonomic
                                classification for the detected features was obtained using the QIIME2 embedded Naïve
                                Bayes fitted classifier, pre-trained on the most recent Greengenes reference database
                                (ver. 13.8) [16]. Rarefaction curve analysis using the QIIME2 diversity plugin was used
                                to estimate the completeness of microbial communities’ sampling. Subsequently, alpha
                                indexes (Shannon’s diversity index [17], number of observed OTUs, Faith’s Phylogenetic
                                Diversity [18], Pielou’s evenness [19]) and beta dissimilarities (Jaccard distance [20],
                                Bray–Curtis distance [21], unweighted UniFrac and weighted UniFrac distances [22]) were
                                calculated. Jaccard and unweighted UniFrac dissimilarity are “qualitative” as they are
                                based on the presence/absence of taxonomic features (Jaccard) or the fraction of unshared
                                ones (along phylogenetic tree) across samples (Unifrac). Bray–Curtis and weighted Unifrac
                                operate through quantities, i.e., take into account counts of shared features (Bray–Curtis)
                                or weights for unshared “unique” features. These latter distances are more sensitive, al-
                                though, in standard practice, both qualitative and quantitative measures are calculated
                                and evaluated.
                                      Principal Coordinates Analysis (“PCoA”) plots using the EMPeror application [23] for
                                each of the beta diversity metrics were generated to check sample/experimental heterogene-
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                              4 of 14




                                ity. Kruskal–Wallis and PERMANOVA statistical tests were applied to detect differences in
                                the above-mentioned alpha index and beta measures among sample groups, respectively.
                                      Variation in the taxa abundance profiles among groups was explored by composi-
                                tional data analysis methods, i.e., QIIME2-ANCOM, coda-lasso, clr-lasso and Selbal [24].
                                Input for QIIME2-ANCOM consisted of two filtered feature tables, collapsed, respec-
                                tively, at the species and genus levels. We removed contaminant sequences (i.e., of
                                mitochondrial/chloroplast origin) and “ultra-rare” features, appearing in less than 5 sam-
                                ples (i.e., around the 10% of the total considered samples, 53) or with less than 20 counts
                                (across all samples).
                                      Coda-lasso [25], clr-lasso [26] and Selbal feature selection algorithms were additionally
                                implemented (as described in https://malucalle.github.io/Microbiome-Variable-Selection/,
                                accessed on 4 October 2022) in order to retrieve a sort of microbial signature in pairwise
                                group comparisons (Normal_P_T, Polyps_P_T, Tumour, Normal_P, Polyps_P, respectively,
                                from synchronous/lesions_PT and Adenomas_P_T, and from Healthy Controls_HC).
                                      Furthermore, the genetic and functional content within samples was predicted by
                                using the Picrust v2.3.0_b software [27], using the QIIME2 filtered feature table and
                                “representative sequences (rep-seqs.qza file)” as input data. Picrust2 predicted counts
                                for pathways (namely, “unstratified pathway abundance” count table, with pathways rep-
                                resented by their relative MetaCyc [28] were further analyzed through the compositionally
                                aware tool, ALDEx. Analogously to the binary comparisons undertaken for microbial
                                signature analysis, the global pathway table was basically split according to the sample
                                groups, and the “aldex” command for pairwise analysis was run. From the raw output,
                                three ALDEX2 “effect” cutoffs of “1”, “1.5” and “2” (absolute value, from relaxed to strin-
                                gent) were chosen to evidence “differentially abundant” pathways within each comparison.
                                Statistical and graphics analyses were carried out within the R statistical environment,
                                through the packages Microbiome v1.8.0 [29], ggplot2 v3.3.3 [30] and Phyloseq v.1.30.0 [31].

                                3. Results
                                3.1. Clinicopathologic Characteristics and Diversity Analysis
                                     A total of 69 mucosal biopsy specimens were collected. Of them, 26 specimens were
                                from patients with CRC and synchronous adenomatous polyps; biopsies were pinched
                                from colorectal neoplasia (Tumour; N = 9), adenomas (Polyps_P_T; N = 8) and adjacent
                                normal tissues (Normal_P_T; N = 9). All adenomas had the same localization of cancers
                                (distal or proximal to splenic flexure). Features of advanced adenoma (polyp greater than
                                10 mm, villous histology, a severe dysplasia) [32] were identified. When more than one
                                polyp was observed, the most advanced one was considered. DNA extracted from one
                                adenoma specimen, namely, SGR5P, returned no PCR, and was excluded from any further
                                analysis. Other 32 specimens were pinched from adenomatous polyps (Polyps_P; N = 16)
                                and adjacent normal tissues (Normal_P; N = 16). The general characteristics of the par-
                                ticipants are given in Table 1. The control group consisted of 10 healthy non-CRC and
                                non-hospitalized individuals (Normal_HC) with normal colonic mucosa (5 females; mean
                                age at recruitment 47.1 ± 16.2; 6 from left or distal colon, 4 from right or transverse colon).

                                Table 1. General characteristics of patients with CRC and synchronous polyps, adenomatous polyps,
                                and healthy controls subjects.

                                                                                                               CRC and
            Characteristics                                      Healthy Controls   Adenomatous Polyps
                                                                                                          Synchronous Polyps
                                          total number                 10                   16                     9
              Individuals
                                     ratio of females to males         5/5                 3/13                   2/7
                                             median                    47                   70                    66
              Age, years
                                              range                   27–66               41–82                  51–89
                                           early (<50)                  -                   2                      0
           Age of diagnosis
                                            late (>50)                  -                   14                     9
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                                              5 of 14




                                   Table 1. Cont.

                                                                                                                           CRC and
            Characteristics                                             Healthy Controls      Adenomatous Polyps
                                                                                                                      Synchronous Polyps
                                       proximal to splenic flexure             -                      5                       3
          Polyp localization
                                        distal to splenic flexure              -                      11                      6
                                       proximal to splenic flexure             -                      -                       3
          Cancer localization
                                        distal to splenic flexure              -                      -                       6

  Concordance localization of cancer   proximal to splenic flexure             -                      -                      6/6
            and polyp                   distal to splenic flexure              -                      -                      3/3
                                               low grade                       -                      6                       4
           Polyp dysplasia
                                              high grade                       -                      10                      5
 Features of advanced adenoma (AA)        ratio of AA to total                                      14/16                    6/9
              TNM stage                             I                          -                      -                       0
                                                    II                         -                      -                       3
                                                    III                        -                      -                       4
                                                    IV                         -                      -                       1
                                                    NA                         -                      -                       1
           Grading (WHO)                            G1                         -                      -                       2
                                                    G2                         -                      -                       6
                                                    G3                         -                      -                       0
                                                    NA                         -                      -                       1


                                   3.2. 16 S rRNA V3-V4 Region Sequencing
                                        After the QIIME2 Quality Control procedure, we obtained a sample-specific sequenc-
                                   ing yield ranging from 6417 to 73,116 good-quality reads. Given the raw feature table and
                                   the corresponding phylogenetic tree, we ran several rarefaction tests with different read
                                   depth cutoffs (see Supplementary File S1) to establish an optimal sampling depth with a
                                   minimal sample loss. Rarefaction at a depth of 9103 reads determined the exclusion of only
                                   two poorly sequenced samples (one patient with adenomas and one with synchronous
                                   tissues) while guaranteeing the stable distribution of three alpha diversity metrics in all the
                                   investigated groups.

                                   3.3. Microbial Diversity and Community Analyses
                                        Some weak differences in alpha and beta diversities emerged between healthy controls
                                   and patients. In detail, alpha diversity was evaluated by analyzing four metrics (Shannon
                                   Entropy, Pielou’s evenness, number of observed features, and Faith’s Phylogenetic Distance)
                                   and comparing group-specific distributions through Kruskal–Wallis tests, globally and
                                   pairwise. In Table 2 are reported the q-values for pairwise group comparisons, while
                                   boxplots for diversity analyses are shown in Supplementary File S1.

                                   Table 2. Summary of pairwise group comparisons for four alpha diversity indexes. Benjamini and
                                   Hochberg corrected p-values (q-values) for Kruskal–Wallis tests are shown.

                                                                                   Healthy Colon
                                                                                        vs.
                                       NORMAL_P_T             POLYPS_P_T             TUMOUR                 NORMAL_P          POLYPS_P
         Pielou’s evenness                 0.478                     0.478                 0.236              0.833                0.486
   Faith’s Phylogenetic Distance           0.723                     0.615                 0.932              0.616                0.723
   Number of observed Features             0.472                     0.382                 0.490              0.382                0.472
        Shannon’s Entropy                    1                       0.481                 0.481              0.237                0.583


                                       When normal tissues or polyps or tumors from synchronous lesions (HC vs. Normal_P_T,
                                   HC vs. Polyps_P_T and HC vs. Tumor, respectively) were compared with HC, we high-
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                                  6 of 14




                                  lighted that the microbial communities were characterized by a lower diversity, although
                                  no significant differences emerged at all the analyzed alpha index values (q-values > 0.05).
                                       We also compared four beta dissimilarity metrics (Bray–Curtis, Jaccard, Unweighted
                                  Unifrac, and Weighted Unifrac) through the PERMANOVA pairwise test and visualized
                                  sample dissimilarity through Emperor Plots (Supplementary File S1).
                                       Comparison between tissues from synchronous samples and HC showed a statisti-
                                  cally significant difference in terms of Jaccard dissimilarity for all the analyzed groups
                                  (q-value < 0.05). The difference was significant also for Bray–Curtis dissimilarity at the
                                  tumor level (q-value = 0.03), while it was weakly associated to Normal_P_T (q-value = 0.05).
                                       When we compared the microbiota of HC to those with adenomas and adjacent
                                  normal tissues from the same subject, the differences among the samples was signif-
                                  icantly different only for Jaccard dissimilarity (Normal_P, q-value = 0.026; Polyps_P,
                                  q-value = 0.015) (Table 3).

                                  Table 3. Summary of pairwise group comparisons for beta diversity measures. Benjamini and
                                  Hochberg corrected p-values (q-values) for PERMANOVA tests are shown.

                                                                             Healthy Colon
                                                                                  vs.
                                        NORMAL_P_T          POLYPS_P_T           TUMOR           NORMAL_P           POLYPS_P
      Bray–Curtis dissimilarity              0.050              0.060              0.030             0.126             0.063
          Jaccard similarity                 0.039              0.015              0.020             0.026             0.015
   Unweighted UniFrac dissimilarity          0.461               0.09              0.324             0.324             0.324
    Weighted UniFrac dissimilarity           0.531              0.531              0.531             0.556             0.531


                                             For the “paired” samples, i.e., Normal_P_T, Polyps_P_T and Tumor, given the limited
                                       sample size, no significant differences in terms of alpha and beta diversity indices were
                                       found. Pairwise Kruskal–Wallis tests for Shannon Entropy, evenness, number of observed
                                       OTUs and Faith’s Phylogenetic Distance group distributions gave no significant results.
                                       The distance among such groups (PERMANOVA tests for four beta diversity measures)
                                       was also not significant.
         Microorganisms 2023, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                      7 of 15
                                             The compositions of microbial communities among samples can be observed in   Figure 1,
                                       in which the top 15 most represented (relative abundance) families and genera are shown.




                                  Figure 1. Cont.
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                                         7 of 14




                                     Figure
                                Figure  1. 1.  Relative
                                          Relative      abundance
                                                   abundance        mostmost
                                                                 of of        represented
                                                                         represented  families        andand
                                                                                                 (A) (A)
                                                                                           families           genera
                                                                                                          genera     within
                                                                                                                  within (B) (B) sample
                                                                                                                             sample  groups.
                                     groups.“_”
                                The symbol   Theindicates
                                                 symbol a “_”group
                                                               indicates
                                                                    of a  group of sequences
                                                                       unclassified unclassified(after
                                                                                                  sequences
                                                                                                       the (after the taxonomic
                                                                                                          taxonomic  assignmentassign-
                                                                                                                                  procedure),
                                     ment procedure), while “f_” and “g_” indicate that a group of sequences belongs to an unanno-
                                while “f_” and “g_” indicate that a group of sequences belongs to an unannotated/unnamed families
                                     tated/unnamed families or genera.
                                or genera.
                                          We therefore implemented the QIIME2 ANCOM module to analyze sample micro-
                                      We therefore
                                     bial           implemented
                                          compositions  and detect the  QIIME2
                                                                    relevant     ANCOM
                                                                             variations    module
                                                                                        among  them.toAfter
                                                                                                       analyze
                                                                                                             the sample
                                                                                                                  filtering microbial
                                                                                                                            step,
                                compositions
                                     feature tables of 108 × 68 (genus-collapsed features x samples) and 156 × step,
                                                and  detect relevant  variations  among   them.  After the  filtering         feature
                                                                                                                         68 (spe-
                                tables of  108 × 68features x
                                     cies-collapsed  (genus-collapsed    features
                                                               samples) were  usedxas input
                                                                                     samples)
                                                                                            forand
                                                                                                the 156 × 68 analysis.
                                                                                                    ANCOM       (species-collapsed
                                                                                                                           At the
                                features x samples) were used as input for the ANCOM analysis. At the genus level (L6),
                                “g__Fusobacterium” (ANCOM W statistics = 39) showed a significant differential abundance
                                in synchronous lesions as compared to healthy controls and adenomas (Supplementary
                                File S1). At the species (L7) level, Fusobacterium of an unannotated species (W = 48) was
                                found to significantly change among the synchronous lesions.

                                3.4. Discriminant Taxa from Pairwise Group Comparisons
                                      Differential microbial abundance between group pairs was additionally inves-
                                tigated using the coda-lasso, clr-lasso and Selbal methods. Full results are given in
                                Supplementary File S2.
                                      We observed that six “genus-collapsed” taxa were found in common among the
                                three methods in the HC cohort as compared to the synchronous samples: a feature “X”
                                has been considered “common” when it is selected as “significantly differentially abundant”
                                according to all techniques (although weights are calculated differently among meth-
                                ods). In the pairwise analysis “Normal_HC vs. Normal_P_T”, we pinpointed that
                                Staphylococcus (custom id: 28) and Actinobacillus (id 101) showed greater abundance
                                in healthy control colonic mucosa. In contrast, an unknown genus of the Rikenellaceae
                                family (id 16) was more abundant in normal tissue of synchronous subjects. In the
                                Normal_HC vs. Polyps_P_T analysis, a genus named Gemmiger (id 61) showed greater
                                abundance in Normal_HC, while an unknown genus from the Rikenellaceae family (id 16)
                                and one from Pseudomonas (id 105) were present at a greater abundance in specimens from
                                Polyps_P_T. Of note, although no feature was in common among the three methods used
                                for the Normal_HC vs. Tumor comparison, we noticed that a genus named Fusobacterium
                                (id 83) showed greater abundance in tumor tissues as compared to HC under the coda-lasso,
                                clr-lasso and ANCOM approaches.
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                                    8 of 14




                                      Comparing the microbial composition from the HC cohort to the adenomas samples,
                                 we observed that two genera features were enriched in normal HC: Staphylococcus (id 28)
                                 vs. Normal_P and the Bifidobacterium vs. Polyps_P.

                                 3.5. Differential Analysis of Inferred Microbial Pathways
                                      A total of 1817 gene functions (defined by Enzyme Commission identifiers) and
                                 370 metabolic pathways (defined by MetaCyc identifiers) have been inferred using the
                                 PICRUSt pipeline on the unfiltered QIIME2 feature table.
                                      Using the PICRUSt “unstratified” (i.e., quantities are not stratified per sample) path-
                                 way count table, we identified differentially abundant pathways through pairwise group
                                 comparisons. Supplementary File S3 summarizes our comparative strategy together with
                                 the differentially abundant pathways retrieved by ALDEx2: the “ALDEx2_filtered” sheet
                                 shows a total of 11 differentially abundant items, although they emerge with the most
                                 relaxed “effect” cutoff, 1.
                                      The pathways listed below appear to have a lower (mildly significant) predicted abun-
                                 dance in the Tumor group as compared to the normal control one: ectoine biosynthesis
                                 (MetaCyc identifier: P101-PWY), octane oxidation (P221-PW, myo-inositol degradation I
                                 (P562-PWY), catechol degradation to 2-hydroxypentadienoate II (PWY-5419), catechol
                                 degradation II (meta-cleavage pathway) (PWY-5420), mono-trans, poly-cis decaprenyl
                                 phosphate biosynthesis (PWY-6383), norspermidine biosynthesis (PWY-6562), methyl ke-
                                 tone biosynthesis (engineered) (PWY-7007), myo-, chiro- and scyllo-inositol degradation
                                 (PWY-7237), superpathway of L-alanine biosynthesis (PWY0-1061) and mycothiol biosyn-
                                 thesis (PWY1G-0). No differences appeared for the other four binary comparisons.

                                        3.6. Fusobacterium Nucleatum Detection and Quantification
     Microorganisms 2023, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                        9 of 15

                                       By means of RT-qPCR, we quantified the amount of Fusobacterium nucleatum by
                                 real-time qPCR in synchronous tissues of CRC patients, adenomas, and HC tissues.
                                 HC; the diﬀerences
                                 Fusobacterium         were statistically
                                                  nucleatum    were shown significant in tissue biopsies
                                                                               to be enriched    amongpinched    from Tumor
                                                                                                         synchronous    tissues compared
                                 (Wilcoxon-test p-value = 0.0007), Polyps_P_T (p-value = 0.002) and adjacent Normal_P_T
                                 to HC; the differences were statistically significant in tissue biopsies pinched from Tumor
                                 tissues (p-value = 0.01) (Figure 2).
                                 (Wilcoxon-test     p-value = 0.0007), Polyps_P_T (p-value = 0.002) and adjacent Normal_P_T
                                      The amount of Fusobacterium nucleatum was almost similar to that of HC in both
                                 tissues
                                 Polyps_P (p-value =
                                          (p-value     0.01)and
                                                     = 0.34)  (Figure   2).
                                                                 from adjacent   Normal_P tissues (p-value = 0.93).




                                 Figure 2. Boxplot for ∆CT values of Fusobacterium nucleatum expression within sample groups.
                                 Figure  2. Boxplot for ∆CT values of Fusobacterium nucleatum expression within sample groups.
                                 4. Discussion
                                      In recent decades, researchers have gathered evidence of a correlation between mi-
                                 crobiota, specific strains, signaling pathways, microbiota-related metabolites, and the risk
                                 of colorectal cancer [33]. However, it is not completely understood whether a specific
                                 microbiota profile contributes to the development of sporadic CRC, if and which changes
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                          9 of 14




                                    The amount of Fusobacterium nucleatum was almost similar to that of HC in both
                                Polyps_P (p-value = 0.34) and from adjacent Normal_P tissues (p-value = 0.93).

                                4. Discussion
                                      In recent decades, researchers have gathered evidence of a correlation between micro-
                                biota, specific strains, signaling pathways, microbiota-related metabolites, and the risk of
                                colorectal cancer [33]. However, it is not completely understood whether a specific micro-
                                biota profile contributes to the development of sporadic CRC, if and which changes occur
                                in the microbial composition during the progression of colorectal cancer, and if microbiota
                                alterations in the precancerous condition (colorectal polyps) can predict progression toward
                                a neoplasia.
                                      In this study, we chose to study the mucosal microbiota, believing that it mostly
                                interacts with neoplastic lesions and the immune system [34].
                                      We performed targeted bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequencing and qPCR on bacterial
                                DNA to examine the crosstalk between microbiota, polyps, and colorectal cancers, and to
                                identify possible differences or gradients in concentration of the microbial composition of
                                patients with adenomas alone and those with synchronous lesions.
                                      Even though we identified differences in the abundance of a few species between
                                synchronous CRC lesions and HC, a deep microbial dysbiosis was not observed, at least
                                when using crude alpha and beta diversity indices. Under the alpha metrics, the microbial
                                communities were characterized by a lower diversity, although a weak association was
                                observed when Tumor samples were compared with HC ones. Under multiple hypothesis
                                testing (q-values), though, the results were not significant.
                                      Microbial compositions were different in terms of the beta diversity between Tumor
                                specimens and HC, according to the Bray–Curtis dissimilarity, while all the comparisons
                                gave significant results according to the Jaccard similarity index, independently from
                                synchronous CRC specimens and from adenomas ones. Thus, the groups are qualitatively
                                and significantly dissimilar from each other, as determined by calculating Jaccard distances.
                                On the other hand, considering counts of shared features (with respect to the total feature
                                number within a sample pair), only the Tumor group was found to significantly differ from
                                the HC one.
                                      The magnitude of these microbial alterations is in line with other studies elegantly
                                reviewed by Costa and her collaborators [35], in which the mucosal microbiomes between
                                CRC patients and healthy controls were analyzed.
                                      We showed two major subsets of bacterial genera. The first subset showed a greater
                                abundance in healthy controls, and the second was enriched in subjects with synchronous
                                tumors and adenomas, while no taxa were enriched in patients with only adenomas,
                                as highlighted by at least three feature selection methods. The first cluster represents
                                bacteria associated with wellbeing, involved in intestinal homeostasis, which were all
                                mostly abundant in HC: Gemmiger, Actinobacillus, Staphylococcus and Bifidobacterium.
                                      The Gemmiger genus belongs to the Butyrate-producing genera, and was found to
                                be decreased in the Polyps_P_T specimens. Gemmiger was also present at a decreased
                                abundance in patients with blood in their stools in a study aimed at using the detection of
                                blood in the patient’s stool as a marker of colon malignity [36].
                                      The Actinobacillus genus was enriched in HC when compared to the Polyps_P_T cohort;
                                to date, no data have been available in the literature on its involvement in CRC, except for
                                its presence in normal mucosal swabs of CRC patients [37].
                                      We identified the Staphylococcus genus as more abundant in HC when compared to
                                both normal tissues from tumors (Normal_P_T) and adenomas. (Normal_P). Staphylococcus
                                was found at a greater abundance in healthy tissues in a study reporting on the relationship
                                between the tumor stage and microbiota composition [38].
                                      Further strong negative associations have been shown related to the genera Bifi-
                                dobacterium, identified in subjects with adenomas (Polyps_P), the results of which are in
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                         10 of 14




                                accordance with a study aimed to analyze the microbial composition at the mucosal level
                                of human CRC [39] and at the fecal level in patients with early-stage colorectal cancer [40].
                                      In the second subset, we have included those taxa that were more enriched in syn-
                                chronous tissues, and which could be representative or stand as markers of the disease.
                                Pseudomonas and an unknown genus from the Rikenellaceae family were more abundant in
                                synchronous adenomas (Polyps_P_T), while a genus named Fusobacterium was identified
                                in tumor tissues (Tumours).
                                      The Pseudomonas genus was inversely correlated to CRC in several studies, according
                                to which it exhibited a relatively higher abundance in normal tissues [39,41,42]. However,
                                an increased relative abundance of this potential opportunistic pathogen was found in
                                precancerous lesions [43].
                                      Sun and colleagues [44] assessed a mouse colorectal cancer model, and speculated
                                that the Rikenellaceae family functions as an opportunistic pathogen via the intensification
                                of inflammation or the production of mutagenic toxins.
                                      Overall, the most significant effect of our study was the identification of the
                                Fusobacterium genus, present in the analyzed tools, as relatively more abundant in tu-
                                mor specimens. Despite the small number of cases, the strength of our work is represented
                                by the possibility of evaluating the effects of microbiota on healthy tissue, adenomas, and
                                finally on the CRC in a homogeneous population with synchronous lesions.
                                      Our analysis highlighted that Fusobacterium nucleatum was enriched not only in the
                                tumor tissues, but more importantly, in both specimens with adenomas and the normal
                                tissues of patients with synchronous lesions. Taken together, these results are consistent
                                with those from emerging studies supporting the key role of Fusobacterium nucleatum
                                in carcinogenesis.
                                      Fusobacterium nucleatum, although it is a common type of oral microbiota with a
                                symbiotic relationship with its hosts, has been frequently found to be enriched in pa-
                                tients with colorectal cancer [33]. In addition, there is evidence that the oral concen-
                                tration of Fusobacterium nucleatum can influence colon tissue concentrations, and pre-
                                dict colon cancer prognosis [45]. Fusobacterium nucleatum has been discovered to im-
                                pact cancer cells or modulate the tumor microenvironment, influencing the progres-
                                sion, metastasis, and chemoresistance of CRC by affecting cancer cells or regulating the
                                tumor microenvironment [46].
                                      This organism has been correlated with the DNA methylation of genes within the
                                inflamed colonic mucosa by contributing to the progression of colorectal neoplasia [47],
                                and has been shown to upregulate DNA methyltransferase, resulting in the aberrant
                                epigenetic regulation of tumor-suppressor genes in colonic epithelial cells [48]. Moreover,
                                the Fusobacterium nucleatum induces inflammation and alteration in the intestinal barrier
                                of colorectal cancer tissue, and has been associated with shorter survival [49] and specific
                                somatic mutated genes [50].
                                      Recently, it has been shown that Fusobacterium nucleatum could modulate the tumor
                                microenvironment and influence the response to chemo-radiotherapy in patients with
                                advanced rectal cancer [51]. Fusobacterium nucleatum positivity after neoadjuvant chemo-
                                radiotherapy significantly increased the risk of relapse. Of note, the disappearance of
                                Fusobacterium nucleatum after this induction was correlated with a strong increase in CD8+
                                T cells. On the contrary, tumors showing persistence of Fusobacterium nucleatum after
                                chemo-radiotherapy did not show an increase in CD8+ T cells in post-treatment samples
                                compared with baseline [48].
                                      At present, several studies and meta-analyses [52–54] have focused on Fusobacterium
                                nucleatum as a compelling biomarker for CRC, although they have yielded no complete
                                agreement regarding either the use of the matrices analyzed (stool vs. mucosal specimens)
                                or the methodologies used (qPCR versus 16S rRNA gene amplicon). To date, hope is
                                primarily placed on the use of droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) to identify and quantify low-
                                abundance targets in the hope of accurately detecting potentially oncogenic bacteria, and
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                           11 of 14




                                evidence has also recently been reported related to the detection of the Fusobacterium
                                nucleatum in FFPE CRC tissues [55].
                                      Altogether, these studies show that CRC patients carry a high abundance of
                                Fusobacterium nucleatum, and have clarified its role as a pro-carcinogenic bacterium in
                                various stages of CRC, considering it a leading candidate as both an oncomicrobe and a
                                driver of carcinogenesis.
                                      Using qPCR, we analyzed all the samples by focusing on Fusobacterium nucleatum.
                                Our data highlight the importance of this microorganism, as it was equally distributed in
                                all the tissues pinched from synchronous lesions, but not in those from only adenomas.
                                Fusobacterium nucleatum was significantly enriched not only in tumor tissues, but also in syn-
                                chronous noncancerous adenomas and adjacent normal tissues. Otherwise, no significant
                                differences have been found in patients with adenomas, both in polyps and normal tissues.
                                Altogether, our 16S data, derived by means of an ensemble of metagenomics analysis tools
                                and b quantitative real-time PCR, pinpointed the importance of Fusobacterium nucleatum as
                                the most representative taxa involved in synchronous lesions, which is almost absent in
                                those subjects with adenomas alone, suggesting its involvement in cancer genesis. Notably,
                                these findings are consistent with those of earlier reports [7,56], implying that Fusobacterium
                                nucleatum influences tumorigenesis and plays a key role in distant metastases [10].
                                      From the analysis of the metabolic pathways obtained from the microbial gene con-
                                tent inferred from 16S rRNA gene data, we have shown that the microbial composi-
                                tion of the control group is enriched in bacteria, with the genetic ability to synthesize
                                some “protective bioactive compounds” crucial for the wellbeing of the host, primarily
                                ectoine and mycothiol. Ectoine is a natural powerful cytoprotectant compound found
                                in higher concentrations in halophilic microorganisms, and acts as a compatible solute
                                for the survival of osmotic stress [57], with protective effects on the epithelial barrier
                                during inflammation [58]. Mycothiol is a potent antioxidant compound, and serves as a
                                glutathione (GSH) analogue [59].
                                      We acknowledge that the study has several limitations. The small number of patients
                                with synchronous lesions and adenomas makes it more difficult to generalize the results that
                                we have taken as hypothesis-generating, even if the number of enrolled patients is in line
                                with that value for a monocentric study. Second, the lack of information regarding follow-
                                ups and outcomes hinder the possibility of inferring a correlation. However, the applied
                                computational strategy has enabled us to identify and quantify differences in microbial
                                and functional content among synchronous lesions, adenomas, and control samples. In
                                solving such limitations, we experienced numerous technical challenges. First, we obtained
                                high-quality reads, which required the application of rarefaction tests and feature/sample
                                filtering criteria to obtain reliable diversity metrics and remove ultra-rare taxa. We also
                                took advantage of several (even alternative) bioinformatic packages that, while providing
                                valuable results, also have their limitations. For example, functional differential abundance
                                analyses were carried out on predicted gene quantities, and pathways were reconstructed
                                through these quantities.
                                      In this single-center study of the mucosal microbiota obtained from synchronous
                                lesions, adenomas and healthy controls, weak microbial stability was found, mostly via a
                                comparison among groups. The applied computational strategy identified a small number
                                of both protective taxa and high-risk bacteria associated with neoplasia. If the first subset
                                is enriched in bacteria and functional pathways that play a key role in the wellbeing of
                                the host, the second is particularly enriched in Fusobacterium nucleatum, probably the most
                                representative carcinogenic bacteria that will be of extensive interest.
                                      Here, we have pinpointed that Fusobacterium nucleatum was enriched not only in the
                                tumor tissues, but more importantly, in both specimens with adenomas and in normal
                                tissues of patients with synchronous lesions, whilst subjects with only adenomas showed
                                Fusobacterium nucleatum levels that were almost similar to those of the HC, suggesting equal
                                distribution in all the synchronous lesions, as well as cancer-specificity. These data may
                                shed new light on the role of Fusobacterium nucleatum in colorectal cancer. We hope that in
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                                        12 of 14




                                  future studies, a much larger population-scale study and more precise detection approaches
                                  (i.e., ultrasensitive droplet digital PCR techniques applied on several specimens including
                                  FFPE tissues) may solve this issue, and demonstrate the bacteria to be a leading candidate
                                  for use as both an oncomicrobe and a driver of carcinogenesis, as well as a comprehensive
                                  biomarker of CRC.

                                  Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at:
                                  https://www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/microorganisms11051147/s1, File S1: sequencing statistics,
                                  taxonomical composition (feature counts), diversity and ANCOM analyses by QIIME2 pipeline;
                                  File S2: microbial differential abundance analysis results derived by coda_lasso, clr_lasso and Sel-
                                  bal methods; File S3: pathway prediction and associated differential abundance measurements by
                                  Picrust2 and ALDEx2 packages.
                                  Author Contributions: Conceptualization, O.P., A.L., A.P. and G.B.; Methodology, O.P., S.C., T.L.,
                                  A.G., A.P., M.N., G.C. and T.M.; Software, S.C., A.P., T.M. and G.B.; Validation, O.P., S.C. and A.G.;
                                  Formal analysis, O.P., S.C., A.L., T.L., A.P., M.N. and G.C.; Investigation, O.P. and A.P.; Resources, O.P.
                                  and A.P.; Data curation, O.P., S.C., A.P., D.C., T.P.L., F.P. and G.B.; Writing—original draft, O.P., S.C.
                                  and G.B.; Writing—review & editing, O.P., S.C., A.L., T.M. and F.P.; Visualization, O.P., S.C., A.L., D.C.
                                  and T.M.; Supervision, O.P. and F.P.; Project administration, O.P.; Funding acquisition, O.P. and A.P.
                                  All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                  Funding: This work was funded by the Italian Minister of Health, Ricerca Corrente program 2022–2024
                                  and Reti.
                                  Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was signed by all subjects.
                                  Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available in Supplementary Files.
                                  Due to ethical limitations, further data will be available on request.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Siegel, R.L.; Miller, K.D.; Fuchs, H.E.; Jemal, A. Cancer statistics, 2022. CA Cancer J Clin. 2022, 72, 7–33. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Lichtenstein, P.; Holm, N.V.; Verkasalo, P.K.; Iliadou, A.; Kaprio, J.; Koskenvuo, M.; Pukkala, E.; Skytthe, A.; Hemminki, K.
      Environmental and heritable factors in the causation of cancer–Analyses of cohorts of twins from Sweden, Denmark, and Finland.
      N. Engl. J. Med. 2000, 343, 78–85. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.    Jasperson, K.W.; Tuohy, T.M.; Neklason, D.W.; Burt, R.W. Hereditary and familial colon cancer. Gastroenterology 2010, 138, 2044–2058.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.    Garrett, W.S. Immune recognition of microbial metabolites. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2020, 20, 91–92. [CrossRef]
5.    Chapelle, N.; Martel, M.; Toes-Zoutendijk, E.; Barkun, A.N.; Bardou, M. Recent advances in clinical practice: Colorectal cancer
      chemoprevention in the average-risk population. Gut 2020, 69, 2244–2255. [CrossRef]
6.    Wong, S.H.; Yu, J. Gut microbiota in colorectal cancer: Mechanisms of action and clinical applications. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol.
      Hepatol. 2019, 16, 690–704. [CrossRef]
7.    Flemer, B.; Lynch, D.B.; Brown, J.M.; Jeffery, I.B.; Ryan, F.J.; Claesson, M.J.; O’Riordain, M.; Shanahan, F.; O’Toole, P.W. Tumour-
      associated and non-tumour-associated microbiota in colorectal cancer. Gut 2017, 66, 633–643. [CrossRef]
8.    Arthur, J.C.; Perez-Chanona, E.; Mühlbauer, M.; Tomkovich, S.; Uronis, J.M.; Fan, T.J.; Campbell, B.J.; Abujamel, T.;
      Dogan, B.; Rogers, A.B.; et al. Intestinal inflammation targets cancer-inducing activity of the microbiota. Science 2012, 338,
      120–123. [CrossRef]
9.    Wu, S.; Rhee, K.J.; Albesiano, E.; Rabizadeh, S.; Wu, X.; Yen, H.R.; Huso, D.L.; Brancati, F.L.; Wick, E.; McAllister, F.; et al.
      A human colonic commensal promotes colon tumorigenesis via activation of T helper type 17 T cell responses. Nat. Med.
      2009, 15, 1016–1022. [CrossRef]
10.   Bullman, S.; Pedamallu, C.S.; Sicinska, E.; Clancy, T.E.; Zhang, X.; Cai, D.; Neuberg, D.; Huang, K.; Guevara, F.; Nelson, T.; et al.
      Analysis of Fusobacterium persistence and antibiotic response in colorectal cancer. Science 2017, 358, 1443–1448. [CrossRef]
11.   Matson, V.; Chervin, C.S.; Gajewski, T.F. Cancer and the Microbiome-Influence of the Commensal Microbiota on Cancer, Immune
      Responses, and Immunotherapy. Gastroenterology 2021, 160, 600–613. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Brennan, C.A.; Garrett, W.S. Fusobacterium nucleatum–symbiont, opportunist and oncobacterium. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2019, 17, 156–166.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   16S Metagenomic Sequencing Library Preparation. 2013. Available online: https://support.illumina.com/documents/
      documentation/chemistry_documentation/16s/16s-metagenomic-library-prep-guide-15044223-b.pdf (accessed on 12 March 2023).
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                                            13 of 14




14.   Estaki, M.; Jiang, L.; Bokulich, N.A.; McDonald, D.; González, A.; Kosciolek, T.; Martino, C.; Zhu, Q.; Birmingham, A.;
      Vázquez-Baeza, Y.; et al. QIIME 2 Enables Comprehensive End-to-End Analysis of Diverse Microbiome Data and Comparative
      Studies with Publicly Available Data. Curr. Protoc. Bioinform. 2020, 70, e100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.   Callahan, B.J.; McMurdie, P.J.; Rosen, M.J.; Han, A.W.; Johnson, A.J.; Holmes, S.P. DADA2: High-resolution sample inference
      from Illumina amplicon data. Nat. Methods 2016, 13, 581–583. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.   McDonald, D.; Price, M.N.; Goodrich, J.; Nawrocki, E.P.; DeSantis, T.Z.; Probst, A.; Andersen, G.L.; Knight, R.; Hugenholtz, P. An
      improved Greengenes taxonomy with explicit ranks for ecological and evolutionary analyses of bacteria and archaea. ISME J.
      2012, 6, 610–618. [CrossRef]
17.   Shannon, C.E.; Weaver, W.; Wiener, N. The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Phys. Today 1950, 3, 31–32. [CrossRef]
18.   Faith, D.P. Conservation evaluation and phylogenetic diversity. Biol. Conserv. 1992, 61, 1–10. [CrossRef]
19.   Pielou, E.C. The measurement of diversity in different types of biological collections. J. Theor. Biol. 1966, 13, 131–144. [CrossRef]
20.   Jaccard, P. Nouvelles recherches sur la distribution florale. Bull. De La Soc. Vaud. Des Sci. Nat. 1908, 44, 223.
21.   Sørensen, T.; Sørensen, T. A Method of Establishing Groups of Equal Amplitude in Plant Sociology Based on Similarity of Species Content
      and Ist Application to Analyses of the Vegetation on Danish Commons; I kommission hos E. Munksgaard: Copenhagen, Denmark, 1948.
22.   Lozupone, C.; Knight, R. UniFrac: A new phylogenetic method for comparing microbial communities. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
      2005, 71, 8228–8235. [CrossRef]
23.   Vázquez-Baeza, Y.; Pirrung, M.; Gonzalez, A.; Knight, R. EMPeror: A tool for visualizing high-throughput microbial community
      data. Gigascience 2013, 2, 16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Mandal, S.; Van Treuren, W.; White, R.A.; Eggesbø, M.; Knight, R.; Peddada, S.D. Analysis of composition of microbiomes:
      A novel method for studying microbial composition. Microb. Ecol. Health Dis. 2015, 26, 27663. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.   Lu, J.; Shi, P.; Li, H. Generalized linear models with linear constraints for microbiome compositional data. Biometrics 2019, 75, 235–244.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.   Zou, H.; Hastie, T. Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B (Stat. Methodol.) 2005, 67, 301–320.
      [CrossRef]
27.   Douglas, G.M.; Maffei, V.J.; Zaneveld, J.R.; Yurgel, S.N.; Brown, J.R.; Taylor, C.M.; Huttenhower, C.; Langille, M.G.I. Huttenhower
      C, Langille MGI. PICRUSt2 for prediction of metagenome functions. Nat. Biotechnol. 2020, 38, 685–688. [CrossRef]
28.   Caspi, R.; Billington, R.; Keseler, I.M.; Kothari, A.; Krummenacker, M.; Midford, P.E.; Ong, W.K.; Paley, S.; Subhraveti, P.; Karp, P.D.
      The MetaCyc database of metabolic pathways and enzymes–A 2019 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020, 48, D445–D453. [CrossRef]
29.   Lahti, L.; Shetty, S.; Blake, T. Microbiome R Package; 2019. Available online: http://microbiome.github.io (accessed on 12 March 2023).
30.   Wickham, H. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis; Springer-Verlag: New York, NY, USA, 2016.
31.   McMurdie, P.J.; Holmes, S. phyloseq: An R package for reproducible interactive analysis and graphics of microbiome census data.
      PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e61217. [CrossRef]
32.   O’Brien, M.J.; Winawer, S.J.; Zauber, A.G.; Gottlieb, L.S.; Sternberg, S.S.; Diaz, B.; Dickersin, G.R.; Ewing, S.; Geller, S.;
      Kasimian, D.; et al. The National Polyp Study. Patient and polyp characteristics associated with high-grade dysplasia in
      colorectal adenomas. Gastroenterology 1990, 98, 371–379.
33.   Song, M.; Chan, A.T.; Sun, J. Influence of the Gut Microbiome, Diet, and Environment on Risk of Colorectal Cancer. Gastroenterology
      2020, 158, 322–340. [CrossRef]
34.   Saus, E.; Iraola-Guzmán, S.; Willis, J.R.; Brunet-Vega, A.; Gabaldón, T. Microbiome and colorectal cancer: Roles in carcinogenesis
      and clinical potential. Mol. Asp. Med. 2019, 69, 93–106. [CrossRef]
35.   Costa, C.P.D.; Vieira, P.; Mendes-Rocha, M.; Pereira-Marques, J.; Ferreira, R.M.; Figueiredo, C. The Tissue-Associated Microbiota
      in Colorectal Cancer: A Systematic Review. Cancers 2022, 14, 3385. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.   Chénard, T.; Malick, M.; Dubé, J.; Massé, E. The influence of blood on the human gut microbiome. BMC Microbiol. 2020, 20, 44.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.   Zwinsová, B.; Petrov, V.A.; Hrivňáková, M.; Smatana, S.; Micenková, L.; Kazdová, N.; Popovici, V.; Hrstka, R.; Šefr, R.; Bencsiková, B.
      Colorectal Tumour Mucosa Microbiome Is Enriched in Oral Pathogens and Defines Three Subtypes That Correlate with Markers
      of Tumour Progression. Cancers 2021, 13, 4799. [CrossRef]
38.   Mira-Pascual, L.; Cabrera-Rubio, R.; Ocon, S.; Costales, P.; Parra, A.; Suarez, A.; Moris, F.; Rodrigo, L.; Mira, A.; Collado, M.C.
      Microbial mucosal colonic shifts associated with the development of colorectal cancer reveal the presence of different bacterial
      and archaeal biomarkers. J. Gastroenterol. 2015, 50, 167–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.   Loke, M.F.; Chua, E.G.; Gan, H.M.; Thulasi, K.; Wanyiri, J.W.; Thevambiga, I.; Goh, K.L.; Wong, W.F.; Vadivelu, J. Metabolomics
      and 16S rRNA sequencing of human colorectal cancers and adjacent mucosa. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0208584. [CrossRef]
40.   Liu, X.; Cheng, Y.; Shao, L.; Ling, Z. Alterations of the Predominant Fecal Microbiota and Disruption of the Gut Mucosal Barrier
      in Patients with Early-Stage Colorectal Cancer. Biomed. Res. Int. 2020, 2020, 2948282. [CrossRef]
41.   de Carvalho, A.C.; de Mattos Pereira, L.; Datorre, J.G.; Dos Santos, W.; Berardinelli, G.N.; Matsushita, M.M.; Oliveira, M.A.;
      Durães, R.O.; Guimarães, D.P.; Reis, R.M. Microbiota Profile and Impact of Fusobacterium nucleatum in Colorectal Cancer Patients
      of Barretos Cancer Hospital. Front. Oncol. 2019, 9, 813. [CrossRef]
42.   Gao, R.; Kong, C.; Huang, L.; Li, H.; Qu, X.; Liu, Z.; Lan, P.; Wang, J.; Qin, H. Mucosa-associated microbiota signature in colorectal
      cancer. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 2017, 36, 2073–2083. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1147                                                                                                             14 of 14




43.   Lu, Y.; Chen, J.; Zheng, J.; Hu, G.; Wang, J.; Huang, C.; Lou, L.; Wang, X.; Zeng, Y. Mucosal adherent bacterial dysbiosis in patients
      with colorectal adenomas. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 26337. [CrossRef]
44.   Sun, T.; Liu, S.; Zhou, Y.; Yao, Z.; Zhang, D.; Cao, S.; Wei, Z.; Tan, B.; Li, Y.; Lian, Z.; et al. Evolutionary biologic changes of gut
      microbiota in an ‘adenoma-carcinoma sequence’ mouse colorectal cancer model induced by 1, 2-Dimethylhydrazine. Oncotarget
      2017, 8, 444–457. [CrossRef]
45.   Pignatelli, P.; Iezzi, L.; Pennese, M.; Raimondi, P.; Cichella, A.; Bondi, D.; Grande, R.; Cotellese, R.; Di Bartolomeo, N.; Innocenti, P.
      The Potential of Colonic Tumor Tissue Fusobacterium nucleatum to Predict Staging and Its Interplay with Oral Abundance in Colon
      Cancer Patients. Cancers 2021, 13, 1032. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.   Wang, S.; Liu, Y.; Li, J.; Zhao, L.; Yan, W.; Lin, B.; Guo, X.; Wei, Y. Fusobacterium nucleatum Acts as a Pro-carcinogenic Bacterium in
      Colorectal Cancer: From Association to Causality. Front. Cell. Dev. Biol. 2021, 9, 710165. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.   Ito, M.; Kanno, S.; Nosho, K.; Sukawa, Y.; Mitsuhashi, K.; Kurihara, H.; Igarashi, H.; Takahashi, T.; Tachibana, M.; Takahashi, H.; et al.
      Association of Fusobacterium nucleatum with clinical and molecular features in colorectal serrated pathway. Int. J. Cancer
      2015, 137, 1258–1268. [CrossRef]
48.   Xia, X.; Wu, W.K.K.; Wong, S.H.; Liu, D.; Kwong, T.N.Y.; Nakatsu, G.; Yan, P.S.; Chuang, Y.M.; Chan, M.W.; Coker, O.O.; et al.
      Bacteria pathogens drive host colonic epithelial cell promoter hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes in colorectal cancer.
      Microbiome 2020, 8, 108. [CrossRef]
49.   Mima, K.; Nishihara, R.; Qian, Z.R.; Cao, Y.; Sukawa, Y.; Nowak, J.A.; Yang, J.; Dou, R.; Masugi, Y.; Song, M.; et al. Fusobacterium
      nucleatum in colorectal carcinoma tissue and patient prognosis. Gut 2016, 65, 1973–1980. [CrossRef]
50.   Borozan, I.; Zaidi, S.H.; Harrison, T.A.; Phipps, A.I.; Zheng, J.; Lee, S.; Trinh, Q.M.; Steinfelder, R.S.; Adams, J.; Banbury, B.L.; et al.
      Molecular and Pathology Features of Colorectal Tumors and Patient Outcomes Are Associated with Fusobacterium nucleatum and
      Its Subspecies animalis. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 2022, 31, 210–220. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.   Serna, G.; Ruiz-Pace, F.; Hernando, J.; Alonso, L.; Fasani, R.; Landolfi, S.; Comas, R.; Jimenez, J.; Elez, E.; Bullman, S.; et al.
      Fusobacterium nucleatum persistence and risk of recurrence after preoperative treatment in locally advanced rectal cancer.
      Ann. Oncol. 2020, 31, 1366–1375. [CrossRef]
52.   Peng, B.J.; Cao, C.Y.; Li, W.; Zhou, Y.J.; Zhang, Y.; Nie, Y.Q.; Cao, Y.W.; Li, Y.Y. Diagnostic Performance of Intestinal Fusobacterium
      nucleatum in Colorectal Cancer: A Meta-Analysis. Chin. Med. J. 2018, 131, 1349–1356. [CrossRef]
53.   Sze, M.A.; Schloss, P.D. Leveraging Existing 16S rRNA Gene Surveys To Identify Reproducible Biomarkers in Individuals with
      Colorectal Tumors. mBio 2018, 9, e00630-18. [CrossRef]
54.   Zhong, X.; Wang, Y.; Xu, J.; Cao, H.; Zhang, F.; Wang, X. Gut microbiota signatures in tissues of the colorectal polyp and normal
      colorectal mucosa, and faeces. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2023, 12, 1054808. [CrossRef]
55.   Datorre, J.G.; de Carvalho, A.C.; Dos Reis, M.B.; Dos Reis, M.; Matsushita, M.; Santos, F.; Guimarães, D.P.; Reis, R.M. Accuracy
      and Clinical Relevance of Intra-Tumoral Fusobacterium nucleatum Detection in Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) Tissue
      by Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR) in Colorectal Cancer. Diagnostics 2022, 12, 114. [CrossRef]
56.   Allali, I.; Delgado, S.; Marron, P.I.; Astudillo, A.; Yeh, J.J.; Ghazal, H.; Amzazi, S.; Keku, T.; Azcarate-Peril, M.A. Gut microbiome
      compositional and functional differences between tumor and non-tumor adjacent tissues from cohorts from the US and Spain.
      Gut Microbes 2015, 6, 161–172. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.   Pastor, J.M.; Salvador, M.; Argandoña, M.; Bernal, V.; Reina-Bueno, M.; Csonka, L.N.; Iborra, J.L.; Vargas, C.; Nieto, J.J.; Cánovas, M.
      Ectoines in cell stress protection: Uses and biotechnological production. Biotechnol. Adv. 2010, 28, 782–801. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.   Castro-Ochoa, K.F.; Vargas-Robles, H.; Chánez-Paredes, S.; Felipe-López, A.; Cabrera-Silva, R.I.; Shibayama, M.; Betanzos, A.;
      Nava, P.; Galinski, E.A.; Schnoor, M. Homoectoine Protects Against Colitis by Preventing a Claudin Switch in Epithelial Tight
      Junctions. Dig. Dis. Sci. 2019, 64, 409–420. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.   Rani, A.; Saini, K.C.; Bast, F.; Mehariya, S.; Bhatia, S.K.; Lavecchia, R.; Zuorro, A. Microorganisms: A Potential Source of Bioactive
      Molecules for Antioxidant Applications. Molecules 2021, 26, 1142. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
