            microorganisms

Article
The Archaeome’s Role in Colorectal Cancer: Unveiling the
DPANN Group and Investigating Archaeal
Functional Signatures
Nour El Houda Mathlouthi 1 , Imen Belguith 2 , Mariem Yengui 1 , Hamadou Oumarou Hama 3 ,
Jean-Christophe Lagier 3 , Leila Ammar Keskes 2 , Ghiles Grine 3,4 and Radhouane Gdoura 1, *

                                         1   Laboratoire de Recherche Toxicologie Microbiologie Environnementale et Santé (LR17ES06),
                                             Faculté des Sciences de Sfax, University of Sfax, Sfax 3000, Tunisia; nourhouda0810@gmail.com (N.E.H.M.);
                                             yenguiimariem1995@gmail.com (M.Y.)
                                         2   Laboratoire de Recherche de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Faculté de Médecine de Sfax,
                                             University of Sfax, Avenue Majida BOULILA, Sfax 3029, Tunisia; mayno87.ib@gmail.com (I.B.);
                                             ammarkeskesl@gmail.com (L.A.K.)
                                         3   IHU Méditerranée Infection, l’unité de Recherche Microbes, Evolution, Phylogénie et Infection (MEPHI),
                                             19-21, Bd. Jean Moulin, 13005 Marseille, France; hamadouh2o@gmail.com (H.O.H.);
                                             jean-christophe.lagier@univ-amu.fr (J.-C.L.); grineghiles@gmail.com (G.G.)
                                         4   Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Aix-Marseille Université, IHU Méditerranée Infection,
                                             l’unité de Recherche Microbes, Evolution, Phylogénie et Infection (MEPHI), 13005 Marseille, France
                                         *   Correspondence: radhouane.gdoura@fss.usf.tn


                                         Abstract: Background and Aims: Gut microbial imbalances are linked to colorectal cancer (CRC), but
                                         archaea’s role remains underexplored. Here, using previously published metagenomic data from
                                         different populations including Austria, Germany, Italy, Japan, China, and India, we performed
                                         bioinformatic and statistical analysis to identify archaeal taxonomic and functional signatures related
Citation: Mathlouthi, N.E.H.;            to CRC. Methods: We analyzed published fecal metagenomic data from 390 subjects, comparing the
Belguith, I.; Yengui, M.; Oumarou        archaeomes of CRC and healthy individuals. We conducted a biostatistical analysis to investigate the
Hama, H.; Lagier, J.-C.; Ammar           relationship between Candidatus Mancarchaeum acidiphilum (DPANN superphylum) and other archaeal
Keskes, L.; Grine, G.; Gdoura, R. The    species associated with CRC. Using the Prokka tool, we annotated the data focusing on archaeal
Archaeome’s Role in Colorectal           genes, subsequently linking them to CRC and mapping them against UniprotKB and GO databases
Cancer: Unveiling the DPANN              for specific archaeal gene functions. Results: Our analysis identified enrichment of methanogenic
Group and Investigating Archaeal
                                         archaea in healthy subjects, with an exception for Methanobrevibacter smithii, which correlated with
Functional Signatures.
                                         CRC. Notably, CRC showed a strong association with archaeal species, particularly Natrinema sp. J7-2,
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742.
                                         Ferroglobus placidus, and Candidatus Mancarchaeum acidiphilum. Furthermore, the DPANN archaeon
https://doi.org/10.3390/
                                         exhibited a significant correlation with other CRC-associated archaea (p < 0.001). Functionally, we
microorganisms11112742
                                         found a marked association between MvhB-type polyferredoxin and colorectal cancer. We also high-
Academic Editor: Konstantinos            lighted the association of archaeal proteins involved in the biosynthesis of leucine and the galactose
Triantafyllou
                                         metabolism process with the healthy phenotype. Conclusions: The archaeomes of CRC patients
Received: 21 August 2023                 show identifiable alterations, including a decline in methanogens and an increase in Halobacteria
Revised: 25 September 2023               species. MvhB-type polyferredoxin, linked with CRC and species like Candidatus Mancarchaeum
Accepted: 11 October 2023                acidiphilum, Natrinema sp. J7-2, and Ferroglobus placidus emerge as potential archaeal biomarkers.
Published: 10 November 2023              Archaeal proteins may also offer gut protection, underscoring archaea’s role in CRC dynamics.

                                         Keywords: colorectal cancer; gut microbiome; archaea; DPANN group; MvhB-type polyferredoxin;
                                         Ferroglobus placidus; Natrinema sp. J7-2; archaeal biomarker
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons       1. Introduction
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://         Colorectal cancer (CRC) is considered to be one of the deadliest cancers worldwide,
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/         with an estimated incidence of 1.9 million cases in 2020 [1]. The gut microbiota appear to
4.0/).




Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms11112742                       https://www.mdpi.com/journal/microorganisms
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742                                                                                             2 of 13




                                be one key factor in CRC tumorigenesis [2]. It is a complex ecosystem that includes many
                                microorganisms hosted in the digestive tract, mainly bacteria, viruses, fungi, and archaea.
                                       An impairment of the gut microbiota, referred to as dysbiosis, can favor the coloniza-
                                tion of the intestinal mucosa by opportunistic microbes [3], which could be involved in
                                carcinogenesis according to a “driver-passenger” model. The first stage consists of colon
                                colonization by pathogenic “driver” bacteria with pro-inflammatory and pro-carcinogenic
                                potential, such as Bacteroides fragilis and Escherichia coli species, contributing to the initi-
                                ation of CRC [4]. The second step involves opportunistic “passenger” bacteria, such as
                                Fusobacterium nucleatum, leading to tumor growth and its progression via interactions with
                                the host immune system or the production of metabolites [5].
                                       Viromes were also found to be changed when comparing the late and early stages
                                of CRC. Advanced CRC microbiomes were enriched with several bacteriophages such
                                as Betabaculus virus and Mulikevirus [6]. In addition, the abundance of human papil-
                                lomavirus (HPV) and bocavirus was found to be significantly higher in tumoral tissues
                                compared to adjacent tissues [7]. It was proposed that colon viruses could induce DNA
                                alteration and alter immune homeostasis [6,8].
                                       CRC is also linked to a fecal fungal dysbiosis presented by an abundance of Basid-
                                iomycetes and Ascomycetes as well as opportunistic fungi such as Malassezia. In contrast,
                                the depletion of Saccharomycetes such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae was highlighted. This
                                fungal species was found to exhibit regulatory and anti-inflammatory effects on the host by
                                inducing interleukin-10 production [9,10].
                                       However, due to the difficulty of culturing, detecting, and identifying it, archaea
                                have remained “a forgotten player in the human microbiota” [11,12], and researchers only
                                recently brought into focus the importance of the archaeome in CRC [13].
                                       Archaea are prokaryotic unicellular microorganisms, and their entirety, including their
                                genetic material in a particular environment, is called an archaeome [14]. Some of these
                                microbes are characterized by membranes built with ether/isoprenoid chains of L-glycerol,
                                and their cell walls lack peptidoglycan [15], while others are shared with eukaryotes or
                                bacteria. The archaea were mainly considered extremophiles, residing in environments
                                foreign to the human habitat and the microbial ecosystem. Thanks to the progress of
                                molecular methods, especially the development of DNA sequencing and metagenomics,
                                the presence of archaea in non-extreme environments has been revealed [16].
                                       Indeed, metagenomic analyses highlighted its presence in the human microbiome and
                                its ability to behave as a pathogen. Among its characteristics that may mediate human
                                pathogenicity, we cite the ability to access and colonize the human microbiome and to
                                compete with other endogenous microbes for survival, inducing dysbiosis [16], and the
                                possibility to exchange their genetic material via the horizontal gene transfer process,
                                i.e., exchanging pathogenic genes [17]. It was shown previously that the only groups of
                                archaea involved in the dysbiosis of the human microbiota are the methanogenic archaea
                                (named methanogens within the manuscript), which were found to be reduced in Crohn’s
                                disease, ulcerative colitis, and severe acute malnutrition [18,19]. One of the most studied
                                methanogens was Methanobrevibacter smithii, which is so far the only archaea implicated
                                in microbial dysbiosis, including vaginosis and urinary tract infection [20]. Recently, a
                                study performed on a Chinese population showed enrichment of halophilic archaea and
                                depletion of methanogens in CRC compared to healthy subjects [13].
                                       Among the archaea clades detected recently in the human gut microbiota [21] is the
                                DPANN (Diapherotrites, Parvarchaeota, Aenigmarchaeota, Nanoarchaeota, and Nanohaloar-
                                chaeota) superphylum proposed in 2013 [22], characterized by its small cell size, limited
                                metabolic capacities [23], and unique genetic characteristics [24]. The lack of genes asso-
                                ciated with essential metabolic pathways in these microorganisms indicates a potential
                                dependence on symbiotic relationships with other organisms, or even a parasitic mode
                                of existence [25]. While their symbiotic or parasitic lifestyles could increase the chances
                                for horizontal gene transfer with potentially pathogenic organisms, especially given their
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742                                                                                          3 of 13




                                prevalence in tumor microenvironments [26], there is currently no established evidence
                                linking them to colorectal carcinogenesis.
                                     A prior study linked specific archaeal metabolites, such as short-chain fatty acids,
                                indoles, and arsenic, to carcinogenesis. Metabolites such as H2 and trimethylamine (TMA)
                                have been linked to carcinogens, specifically H2S and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO).
                                These carcinogens are implicated in processes like inflammation, DNA damage, geno-
                                toxicity, and disrupted signaling pathways [21]. It is worth noting, however, that these
                                metabolites can also be produced by other microorganisms, such as bacteria [27,28]. Thus,
                                the unique functional signature of archaea in the gut microbiome of colorectal cancer
                                remains to be discovered.
                                     In our study, we delved into the relationship between the archaeome and colorectal
                                cancer by examining 390 published fecal metagenomics datasets from both CRC patients
                                and healthy individuals. We employed bivariate and multivariate analyses to explore the
                                associations of the DPANN archaeon (Candidatus Mancarchaeum acidiphilum) with other
                                detected archaeal species. Furthermore, we conducted a functional analysis to pinpoint the
                                unique archaeal functional signatures present in the gut of CRC patients.

                                2. Materials and Methods
                                2.1. Published Fecal Metagenomic Data
                                     Published metagenomes of 390 fecal specimens were examined, including samples
                                from 192 CRC patients and 198 randomly selected controls (Table 1). Datasets of published
                                fecal metagenomes are available from the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) database
                                “https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/home” (accessed on 20–25 April 2022). Bioproject
                                accession numbers are presented in Table 1. The clinical characteristics are shown in
                                Supplementary Data S1.

                                Table 1. Summary of study populations.

                                    Project n◦            CRC               Healthy         Country          Reference
                                   PRJEB7774                20                 24            Austria            [29]
                                   PRJEB27928               42                 39           Germany             [30]
                                  PRJNA447983               22                 22              Italy            [31]
                                   PRJDB4176                33                 35             Japan             [32]
                                   PRJEB10878               46                 48            China              [33]
                                  PRJNA397112               29                 30             India             [34]


                                2.2. Bioinformatic Processing and Biostatistical Analysis
                                2.2.1. Taxonomic Analysis
                                Archaea Identification
                                      The assignment of taxonomic labels to the published metagenomic data of 390 fecal
                                samples was performed with Kraken, which is a taxonomic sequence classifier that labels
                                short DNA reads with taxonomic labels [35]. This was performed by looking at the k-mers
                                in a read and then querying a database with those k-mers. In a taxonomic tree of all genomes
                                containing that k-mer, every k-mer in Kraken’s genomic library was mapped to its lowest
                                common ancestor (LCA). After that, the set of LCA taxa corresponding to a read’s k-mers
                                was analyzed to produce a single taxonomic label for the read, which could be any node in
                                the taxonomic tree [35]. The taxonomic analysis of the metagenomic data was performed
                                using the Galaxy Europe platform and its tool “Kraken” by mapping them against the
                                archaea database “archaea 2020”; we used default parameters. The outputs of Kraken were
                                then assembled into one single output “Kraken abundance table” (Supplementary Data S2),
                                using the “Kraken taxonomic report” tool “https://usegalaxy.eu/” (accessed on 20 April
                                to 2 May 2022).
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742                                                                                             4 of 13




                                Data Filtering and Archaeal Species Patterns in Colorectal Cancer
                                      Data filtering was applied to remove low-quality features from the data, as very
                                small numbers in very few samples were likely due to sequencing errors. To reduce
                                false positives resulting from sequencing errors or low-level contamination, taxonomic
                                characteristics were filtered based on their minimum count (set at four) and prevalence (at
                                least 20% of samples containing four or more counts). Additionally, features that remained
                                constant throughout the experiment were removed by filtering based on low variance
                                (10% of features, determined using the inter-quantile range). Following filtering, library
                                size differences were adjusted using cumulative sum scaling (CSS) normalization. Data
                                filtering and normalization were performed using microbiomeAnalysit “https://www.
                                microbiomeanalyst.ca/MicrobiomeAnalyst/home.xhtml” (accessed on 3–5 May 2022).
                                Spearman correlation was used to calculate the correlation between archaeal species, CRC,
                                and healthy phenotypes. A p-value less than 0.05 (typically ≤ 0.05) was statistically
                                significant. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS for Windows 20.0 (SPSS 20.0 for
                                Windows; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).

                                Correlation Analysis of DPANN Archaea and Other Archaeal Species
                                     The Spearman’s correlation coefficient was calculated to estimate the possible associa-
                                tions between the DPANN archaeon Candidatus Mancarchaeum acidiphilum and the different
                                archaeal species detected in the gut microbiomes of healthy subjects and CRC patients
                                (Supplementary Data S3). A p-value less than 0.05 (typically ≤ 0.05) was statistically sig-
                                nificant. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS for Windows 20.0 (SPSS 20.0 for
                                Windows; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).

                                Multivariate Analysis
                                     A multivariate analysis was performed to identify the association between Candidatus
                                Mancarchaeum acidiphilum, considered an independent factor, and other archaeal species sig-
                                nificantly associated with CRC or healthy phenotypes and found to be strongly correlated
                                with the DPANN archaeon following bivariate analysis, which are Methanocella conradii,
                                Natrinema sp. J7-2, Ferroglobus placidus, Methanobrevibacter olleyae, Sulfolobus sp. E5-1-F, Py-
                                rolobus fumarii, and Thermococcus chitonophagus (Supplementary Data S4). Statistical analyses
                                were performed using SPSS for Windows 20.0 (SPSS 20.0 for Windows; SPSS Inc., Chicago,
                                IL, USA). A two-sided p-value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

                                2.2.2. Data Assembly
                                     De novo assembly of the metagenomic data was performed using the MEGAHIT
                                tool in the Galaxy Europe platform https://usegalaxy.eu/ (accessed on 1–6 June 2023).
                                MEGAHIT is a computational tool for ultra-fast assembly of large and complex metage-
                                nomics sequencing data [36]. The adjustment of assembly parameters was carried out
                                following the instructions of the tutorial provided by the Galaxy Training Network [37].
                                Briefly, in the basic assembly options, the minimum k-mer size was adjusted to 21, the
                                maximum k-mer size was adjusted to 91, and the increment of k-mer size for each iteration
                                was fixed at 12.

                                2.2.3. Functional Analysis
                                Genome Annotation
                                     A functional study was then carried out using the contigs generated by the MEGAHIT
                                tool. For this investigation, we utilized Prokka, a rapid prokaryotic genome annotation
                                tool hosted on the Galaxy Europe platform. Prokka is used to predict and annotate coding
                                sequences, rRNAs, tRNAs, and other genomic features. It annotates microbial genomes
                                by integrating several bioinformatics tools, including Prodigal, RNAmmer, Aragorn, Sig-
                                nalP, and Infernal [38]. To map the contigs against only archaeal genes, we adjusted the
                                “kingdom” option to “Archaea” “https://usegalaxy.eu/” (accessed on 5–7 June 2023).
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742                                                                                              5 of 13




                                Association of Archaeal Genes with Colorectal Cancer
                                     The set of archaeal genes found in the studied metagenomic data was then analyzed
                                using Spearman’s correlation test in Python [39] to establish their relationship with the
                                CRC phenotype. The genes found to be correlated with CRC were then mapped against the
                                UniprotKB database (https://www.uniprot.org/), accessed on 8–10 June 2023, to identify
                                the genes that are mostly or only found in archaeal species. The identified genes were
                                mapped against Uniprot-Gene Ontology (GO) database (https://www.uniprot.org/help/
                                gene_ontology), accessed on 12–14 June 2023, to find their biological function.

                                3. Results
                                3.1. Study Characterization and Data Processing
                                     We analyzed published fecal metagenomic data generated from metagenomic shotgun
                                sequencing of fecal samples collected from 192 CRC patients and 198 healthy controls
                                (Table 1, Supplementary Data S1). The pan-archaeome included 7 archaeal phyla, 11 ar-
                                chaeal classes, and 294 archaeal species found in both CRC and healthy samples (Supple-
                                mentary Data S2). A total of 62 low-abundance features (archaeal species) were removed
                                based on prevalence, and 25 low-variance features were removed based on an inter-quantile
                                range (IQR); 216 features remained after data filtering (Supplementary Data S3). For the
                                archaeal phyla and archaeal classes, the filtering step eliminated one and two low-variance
                                features, respectively (Supplementary Data S3).

                                3.2. Archaeal Communities Associated with CRC Microbiomes
                                     The taxonomic analysis revealed the presence of six phyla in the gut microbiomes of
                                healthy and CRC subjects, which are Euryarchaeota, Thermoproteota, Nitrososphaerota,
                                Candidatus Geothermarchaeota, Candidatus Micrarchaeota, and Candidatus Lokiarchaeota.
                                A strong correlation between Candidatus Micrarchaeota, a phylum belonging to the super-
                                phylum DPANN, and CRC patients was highlighted (p < 0.001). Euryarchaeota was also
                                correlated with the CRC phenotype, unlike Candidatus Geothermarchaeota, which was
                                found to be associated with healthy subjects (Table 2).

                                Table 2. Correlation analysis of archaeal phyla and CRC phenotype.

                                            Phylum                Spearman’s Correlation Coefficient (r)         p-Value
                                   Candidatus Micrarchaeota                        0.199                           0.000
                                         Candidatus
                                                                                  −0.147                           0.004
                                      Geothermarchaeota
                                        Euryarchaeota                             0.118                            0.020
                                       Thermoproteota                             −0.046                           0.369
                                   Candidatus Lokiarchaeota                       0.005                            0.916
                                       Nitrososphaerota                           −0.004                           0.933


                                      In our study, we detected the presence of nine classes after the filtering step of the data
                                presented by Archaeoglobi, Thermoplasmata, Methanococci, Halobacteria, Methanobac-
                                teria, Thermoprotei, Nitrososphaeria, Methanomicrobia, and Thermococci. We found a
                                significant positive correlation between Archaeoglobi and CRC patients (p = 0.017) (Table 3).
                                      The Spearman correlation showed a significant association between the different Halobac-
                                teria sp. and CRC phenotype. Halapricum salinum, Halomicrobium sp. LC1Hm, Halosimplex
                                rubrum, Salinibaculum litoreum, Haloferax gibbonsii, Halopenitus persicus, Halorubrum sp. RHB-C,
                                Halorubrum trapanicum, Halostagnicola larsenii, and Natrinema sp. J7-2 were positively and
                                highly correlated with CRC gut microbiomes (p < 0.001) (Supplementary Data S4). As for
                                Haloferax alexandrines and Halorubrum lacusprofundi, these halophilic archaea were highly
                                correlated with healthy subjects (p < 0.001). Other than halophilic archaea, Methanoculleus
                                bourgensis, Methanocella conradii, Methanosphaerula palustris, and Thermococcus sp. were
                                correlated with CRC patients (p < 0.001). Methanobacteria sp. and Methanomicrobia sp.
                                were more abundant in healthy subjects’ gut microbiomes than in CRC patients. From
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742                                                                                                  6 of 13




                                  the Methanobacteriaceae family, we highlighted a strong correlation (p < 0.001) between
                                  healthy subjects and Methanothermobacter wolfeii, Methanobrevibacter olleyae, Methanobac-
                                  terium paludism, and Methanobacterium sp. MZ-A1. In contrast, Methanobrevibacter smithii
                                  showed a high correlation with CRC patients (p < 0.001). Regarding Methanomicrobia sp.,
                                  correlation analysis revealed a strong and significant association (p < 0.001) between healthy
                                  gut microbiomes and Methanosarcina barkeri, Methanosarcina flavescens, and Methanosarcina
                                  siciliae. Two archaeal species belonging to the Archaeglobi class showed different corre-
                                  lations with the CRC phenotype; Ferroglobus placidus was found to be highly correlated
                                  with CRC patients (p < 0.001), and Archaeoglobus veneficus was correlated with healthy
                                  subjects (p = 0.025). Our analysis revealed the detection of a DPANN archaeon, presented
                                  by Candidatus Mancarchaeum acidiphilum, and its correlation with the CRC gut microbiome
                                  (p = 0.002) (Supplementary Data S4).

                                  Table 3. Correlation analysis of archaeal classes and CRC phenotype.

                                                Class                 Spearman’s Correlation Coefficient (r)        p-Value
                                           Archaeoglobi                               0.1199                       0.017844
                                          Thermoplasmata                             0.088356                      0.081387
                                           Methanococci                              −0.08369                      0.09889
                                            Halobacteria                             −0.05394                      0.28799
                                          Methanobacteria                            0.042504                       0.40256
                                           Thermoprotei                              −0.03954                      0.43616
                                          Nitrososphaeria                            0.03813                       0.45273
                                          Methanomicrobia                            −0.02483                      0.62497
                                            Thermococci                              −0.02424                      0.63325


                                  3.3. DPANN Archaeon Association with the Different Archaeal Species Detected in Healthy and
                                  CRC Subjects
                                        Bivariate analysis showed a significant positive association (p < 0.001) between Candi-
                                  datus Mancarchaeum acidiphilum and archaeal species positively correlated with CRC gut
                                  microbiomes (Section 3.2): Methanocella conradii, Methanoculleus bourgensis, Natrinema sp.
                                  J7-2, F. placidus, and Methanohalophilus halophilus. However, the DPANN archaeon was
                                  negatively and significantly correlated (p < 0.001) with archaea previously revealed to
                                  be associated with healthy subjects (Section 3.2): Sulfolobus sp. E5-1-F, Pyrolobus fumarii,
                                  Thermococcus chitonophagus, Methanobrevibacter olleyae, and Methanobacterium sp. MZ-A1
                                  (Supplementary Data S4). The multivariate analysis showed a highly significant correlation
                                  between Candidatus Mancarchaeum acidiphilum and both Natrinema sp. J7-2 and F. placidus
                                  (p < 0.001) (Table 4).

                                  Table 4. Multivariate analysis of DPANN archaeon and its association with other archaeal species
                                  detected in the gut microbiome.

                                                             Coefficients a
                                                                  Standardized
                                Unstandardized Coefficients                                      95.0% Confidence Interval for B
           Model                                                   Coefficients         Sig.
                                    B           Std. Error             Beta                      Lower Bound      Upper Bound
 Thermococcus
                                  0.186            0.405               0.032           0.647        −0.610             0.981
 chitonophagus
 Ferroglobus placidus            1.868             0.288              0.278            0.000        1.301              2.435
 Natrinema sp. J7-2              0.872             0.081              0.461            0.000        0.713              1.031
 Methanocella conradii           0.076             0.109              0.030            0.487        −0.138             0.289
 Sulfolobus sp. E5-1-F           −0.199            0.298              −0.355           0.505        −0.784             0.387
 Pyrolobus fumarii               0.269             0.522              0.273            0.607        −0.758             1.296
 Methanobrevibacter olleyae      0.073             0.095              0.081            0.444        −0.114             0.259
                                  a Dependent variable: Candidatus Mancarchaeum acidiphilum.
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742                                                                                               7 of 13




                                3.4. Archaeal Proteins Identified in the Gut Microbiomes of Healthy Individuals and CRC Patients
                                     Following annotation using Prokka, we identified 2427 archaeal proteins belonging
                                to different functional categories, including enzymes (e.g., ribosomal RNA small subunit
                                methyltransferase H, protein-arginine kinase, and glycine dehydrogenase subunits 1 and 2),
                                structural proteins (e.g., DNA-binding protein and membrane-bound lytic murein transgly-
                                cosylase F), and transport proteins (e.g., molybdate/tungstate-binding protein WtpA). Ad-
                                ditionally, we noted the presence of regulatory proteins such as protein-arginine kinase and
                                DNA mismatch repair protein MutL, as well as DNA/RNA-related proteins like DNA poly-
                                merase PolB subunit 25 and error-prone DNA polymerase. Proteins involved in metabolic
                                processes, such as formate-tetrahydrofolate ligase and galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltrans-
                                ferase, were also detected, along with proteins involved in protein modification, including
                                the NAD-dependent protein deacylase sirtuin-5, mitochondrial (Supplementary Data S5).

                                3.5. Association of Proteins Exclusively Detected in Archaea with Colorectal Cancer
                                     To understand the potential implications of the detected archaeal proteins in CRC, we
                                performed a Spearman correlation analysis. We found that 704 of the proteins exhibited
                                either a positive or negative correlation with CRC (Supplementary Data S6). The genes
                                showing a significant association with the CRC phenotype (Supplementary Data S6) and
                                having relative abundance in the studied metagenomic data (Supplementary Data S5) were
                                mapped against the UniProtKB database to identify genes predominantly or exclusively
                                detected in archaea (Supplementary Data S7). We mapped the identified archaeal genes
                                against GO annotations to discern their biological roles. Significantly, we observed a
                                negative correlation between CRC and the archaeal protein, beta-galactosidase BgaH
                                (p = 0.002), which plays a role in galactose metabolic process. Similarly, there was a negative
                                association with the methanogen homoaconitase large subunit (p = 0.019), an archaeal
                                protein involved in the biosynthesis of leucine. On the other hand, the polyferredoxin
                                protein MvhB, associated with energy metabolism, showed a positive correlation with CRC
                                (p = 0.045) (Table 5).

                                Table 5. Association of proteins mostly or exclusively detected in archaea with CRC.

                                                                           % of UniprotKB
                                       Spearman’s
                                                                         Search Results with
              Proteins                 Correlation           p-Value                                     GO Annotation
                                                                         Taxonomy: Archaea
                                      Coefficient (r)
                                                                         and Query: Protein
    Beta-galactosidase BgaH            −0.155543828           0.002              100%              Galactose Metabolic Process
  Methanogen homoaconitase
                                       −0.11878052            0.019              100%              Leucine biosynthetic process
          large subunit
  Polyferredoxin protein MvhB           0.101673216           0.045               96%                   Energy Metabolism


                                4. Discussion
                                     CRC presents a public health problem; its incidence rate is estimated to increase from
                                1,931,590 new cases in 2020 to 3,154,674 by 2040 [1]. To prevent this huge increase, several
                                scientific researchers have been trying to understand the mechanism of colorectal carcino-
                                genesis, its initiation, and its development. Despite the multifactorial nature of colorectal
                                cancer (CRC), the gut microbiota were found to be correlated with this pathology [40].
                                Unlike the bacteriome, which is the most analyzed component of the gut microbiota, it was
                                only in 2020 that the fecal archaeal DNA of CRC patients was profiled and compared with
                                that of healthy subjects from China [13].
                                     Here, we employed several user-friendly methods to analyze the gut archaeomes
                                of CRC patients and healthy individuals in a large cohort from different populations, in-
                                cluding Galaxy, MicrobiomeAnalysit, and SPSS, for bioinformatics and statistical analyses.
                                Galaxy offers a diverse set of bioinformatic tools specifically designed for metagenomic
                                analysis that allow reproducible analysis workflows, collaboration, and complexity without
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742                                                                                              8 of 13




                                programming experience [41]. Meanwhile, MicrobiomeAnalysit enables complex analysis
                                without bioinformatic expertise or programming knowledge. Together, Galaxy and Mi-
                                crobiomeAnalysit provide a comprehensive and in-depth analysis of metagenomic data,
                                accommodating users of varying experience levels [42]. We used a Python script for the
                                functional analysis to investigate any potential relationships between the discovered genes
                                and CRC. This method was required due to the large number of identified genes which
                                were too numerous for SPSS to analyze.
                                      Taxonomically, after metagenomic data filtering using MicrobiomeAnalysit, a total
                                of 217 archaeal species belonging to different phyla (Euryarchaeota, Thermoproteota,
                                Nitrososphaerota, Candidatus Geothermarchaeota, Candidatus Micrarchaeota, and Candi-
                                datus Lokiarchaeota) were found in healthy and CRC patients. Interestingly, we detected
                                the presence of Candidatus Micrarchaeota belonging to the DPANN superphylum, and we
                                revealed its strong positive correlation with CRC gut microbiomes (p < 0.001).
                                      Statistical tests performed to compare the abundance of archaeal species between
                                CRC patients and healthy subjects showed the enrichment of methanogens in healthy gut
                                microbiomes, except for M. smithii, which was found to be strongly correlated with the
                                CRC phenotype. Previous studies identified the human gut archaeome and found that it
                                consisted mostly of methane-producing archaea (methanogens), especially Methanobacteri-
                                ales [43]. Regarding the abundance of M. smithii in the CRC gut microbiomes, previous
                                research showed conflicting results, and it was reported that this archaeon was associated
                                with Indian CRC patients [44], unlike the Chinese [13] and American [45] populations,
                                which showed its association with the healthy phenotype. We also highlighted the abun-
                                dance of Halobacteria sp. in the CRC gut microbiomes, confirming the previous study of
                                Coker et al. (2020), in which they demonstrated that Natrinema sp. J7-2 exhibited a gradual
                                increase in abundance from the control group to patients with adenoma and then to those
                                with CRC; furthermore, they proposed an association between the enrichment of some
                                Haloarchaea species (Halorubrum sp., Natrinema sp., and Halococcus sp.) in CRC and the
                                intake of salty food [13]. Several studies have reported a positive correlation between
                                the consumption of salty foods and an increased risk of developing CRC [46–48]. This
                                salty food habit, by promoting the proliferation of Haloarchaea, can disrupt the intestinal
                                microbiome not only by altering the availability of nutrients on which intestinal bacteria
                                depend for their growth and survival but also by producing “haloarcheocines”, which are
                                antibiotics produced by the halophile archaea [49]. Another study in which a metagenomic
                                analysis was performed on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues from Tunisian CRC
                                patients showed a significant positive correlation between Halobacteria in tumor tissues
                                compared to healthy mucosa [50].
                                      Archaeoglobi, an archaeal class, was found to be correlated with CRC gut microbiomes
                                according to our statistical analysis. F. placidus belonging to the Archaeoglobi was highly
                                correlated with CRC microbiomes (p < 0.001). This archaeon is the first hyperthermophile
                                known to grow anaerobically by oxidizing acetate and reducing ferric iron (Fe3+ ) to ferrous
                                iron (Fe2+) [51]. Acetate has been shown to inhibit CRC cell proliferation and induce apop-
                                tosis [52], so its deficiency could be considered a risk factor for CRC. The reduction of ferric
                                iron (Fe3+ ) to ferrous iron (Fe2+ ) can generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) [53]. In fact, the
                                role of ROS in carcinogenesis remains controversial, as ROS can have both pro-cancerous
                                and anti-cancerous effects depending on their concentration. At moderate concentrations,
                                ROS can contribute to the initiation, development, and progression of malignant neoplasms
                                through the promotion of cell proliferation, invasion, and angiogenesis. However, at high
                                concentrations, ROS can cause cancer cell apoptosis, leading to tumor suppression [54]. Oth-
                                erwise, other species of archaea (Ferroplasma sp. [55]) and bacteria (Thiobacillus ferrooxidans
                                or Gallionella ferruginea [56] Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans [57]) could oxidize Fe2+ , which can
                                keep a limited concentration of the ferrous iron, thus inducing low concentrations of ROS.
                                Regarding ferric iron and its relationship to CRC and the gut microbiome, a previous study
                                found a significant correlation between microbial siderophores and advanced stages of
                                CRC; taken together [58], we suggest the involvement of gut microbes, presented essentially
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742                                                                                            9 of 13




                                by siderophores-producing bacteria and F. placidus in the iron deficiency in CRC patients.
                                Due to the essential role of iron in supporting immune functions, a lack of iron may lead
                                to an elevated risk of developing cancer by affecting the process of tumor formation and
                                immune surveillance, as well as potentially modifying the immune environment within
                                the tumor [59].
                                       A DPANN archaeon, Candidatus Mancarchaeum acidiphilum, was detected within the
                                studied human gut metagenomic data. Previously, this archaeon was identified in acidic
                                ecosystems [60]. Interactions between this archaeon and protuberances from another
                                archaeal order, Thermoplasmatales, suggested potential metabolite, energy, and macro-
                                molecule (including DNA) exchange [61]. Although we did not find a significant correlation
                                with Thermoplasmatales, we observed its positive association with F. placidus and Natrinema
                                sp. J7-2 in the CRC phenotype context. Evidence from other studies, including findings
                                on Thermotoga maritima [62] and Methylobacterium extorquens [16,63], indicates that archaeal
                                DNA can be shared among both archaeal and non-archaeal species. When considering
                                the association of DPANN archaea with pathogens, there are risks related to the spread of
                                genes contributing to carcinogenic properties, virulence, resistance, and metabolism [64].
                                Such transfers could influence gut microorganisms, potentially exacerbating CRC devel-
                                opment. The prevalence of archaeal microorganisms within gut microbiota is limited.
                                Still, their significance should not be overlooked. To illustrate this point, consider viruses:
                                although they constitute only about 0.2% of gut microbiota, they can incorporate their
                                genes into the human genome, potentially triggering oncogenes [65,66]. Remarkably, a
                                significant portion of genes in archaea, especially in the DPANN group, are classified as
                                “hypothetical” proteins or genomic “dark matter”, accounting for 30% to possibly 80%
                                of their total content [67]. While these genes are still uncharacterized, it should be noted
                                that they may be able to encode pathogenic phenotypes, underscoring the necessity of
                                thorough functional genomics investigations. Characteristics of DPANN archaea, such as
                                reduced genome sizes [22], may indicate fewer obstacles to gene transfer or integration.
                                There is a conceivable, though distant, route for gene transfer if DPANN archaea interact
                                with viruses also infecting eukaryotic cells [68]. Such viruses could assimilate genes from
                                DPANN archaea and later infuse them into a eukaryotic host.
                                       At a functional level, we aimed to understand the unique pathogenic potential of
                                archaea by focusing on genes specific to them. This emphasis arises because many genes
                                can be found across various cellular organisms, including bacteria, eukaryotes, and archaea.
                                Hence, simply mapping metagenomic data against the functional database of archaea might
                                not delineate the distinct role of archaea in colorectal carcinogenesis. When performing
                                Spearman correlation then mapping against UniProtKB, we found a significant correlation
                                with three proteins exclusive to archaeal species. Notably, one of these is the MvhB-
                                type polyferredoxin. Although all organisms include a variety of ferredoxin proteins, the
                                “MvhB-type polyferredoxin” variant is only found in methanogenic archaea and not in
                                other archaeal groups or bacteria [69]. This protein acts as an electron transfer chain in
                                potential redox–enzyme complexes and plays a pivotal role in electron transfer processes.
                                It is composed of three to seven 2[4Fe-4S]-ferredoxin units [69]. Our findings highlight a
                                significant positive association between this protein and CRC. Given that polyferredoxins
                                have an iron–sulfur composition, their production is closely tied to iron availability. Thus,
                                an increase in MvhB-type polyferredoxin production might signal enhanced iron uptake
                                by archaea. Consequently, we propose a potential risk associated with increased archaeal
                                iron intake in CRC, both taxonomically and functionally. We also revealed that BgaH
                                was inversely correlated with CRC. Delving into BgaH’s enzyme function, we found
                                it primarily targets β-d-galactosides lactulose as key substrates [70], which suppresses
                                harmful bacteria and enhances the production of beneficial metabolites like short-chain
                                fatty acids (SCFAs) [71]. We also identified a negative correlation between the methanogen
                                homoaconitase large subunit and the prevalence of CRC. This enzyme is critical for the
                                biosynthesis of leucine, an amino acid recently found to be inversely associated with CRC
                                as well [72]. Our findings are consistent with a prior study in which a decrease in microbial
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742                                                                                                    10 of 13




                                genes associated with the production of branched-chain amino acids, specifically leucine,
                                valine, and isoleucine, was highlighted during carcinogenesis [73].
                                     Our study presents the first metagenomic analysis of the gut microbiome in Tunisian
                                CRC patients. We focused on sequencing DNA taken from tumor-adjacent FFPE tissues
                                from these patients. Significantly, the discovery of archaeal sequences in our samples
                                underscores the viability of conducting an archaeome analysis from FFPE tissues using
                                an affordable DNA extraction protocol and easy-to-use bioinformatic tools. Moreover,
                                our findings highlight a notable enrichment of Halobacteria in the tumor mucosa when
                                compared to the normal mucosa in these CRC patients. Based on these findings, it is
                                important to highlight that the gut microbiome has been shown to have the ability to influ-
                                ence treatment response in several ways, including drug metabolism, immunomodulation,
                                inflammation, and the tumor microenvironment [74,75]. Our findings might open the door
                                for the creation of therapeutic and preventative strategies for colorectal cancer given this
                                wider context.
                                     In terms of limitations, our study’s inability to conduct a comprehensive comparison
                                of archaeomes across the various stages of colorectal carcinogenesis has limited our insight
                                into their evolutionary patterns and influence on disease progression. Additionally, a
                                significant number of genes in archaea are classified as “hypothetical” proteins or termed
                                genomic “dark matter.” As the exact functional roles of these genes remain undetermined,
                                further research is urgently needed to discern their impact on human health and disease.

                                5. Conclusions
                                     In conclusion, we explored the role of gut archaea in colorectal carcinogenesis and
                                identified significant associations between CRC and specific archaeal species, notably
                                Ferroglobus placidus and Natrinema sp. J7-2. Additionally, we detected the presence of the
                                DPANN superphylum in the gut, indicating potential gene transfers that might impact
                                CRC progression. We further emphasized the significance of certain proteins unique to
                                archaeal species, such as the polyferredoxin protein MvhB, Beta-galactosidase BgaH, and
                                Methanogen homoaconitase large subunit, underscoring the importance of comprehending
                                the distinct pathogenic potential of archaea in CRC.

                                Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
                                //www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/microorganisms11112742/s1, Supplementary Data S1: Partic-
                                ipant characterization; Supplementary Data S2: Kraken abundance table; Supplementary Data S3:
                                Processed Kraken abundance; Supplementary Data S4: Biostatistical analysis ((*): statistically sig-
                                nificant correlation at p < 0.05. (**): highly significant correlation at p < 0.01.); Supplementary
                                Data S5: Prokka annotation; Supplementary Data S6: Biostatistical analysis for the functional analysis;
                                Supplementary Data S7: Uniprot annotation.
                                Author Contributions: Conceptualization, N.E.H.M., M.Y., H.O.H., L.A.K., G.G. and R.G.; Methodol-
                                ogy, I.B., H.O.H. and G.G.; Software, N.E.H.M., I.B. and M.Y.; Validation, J.-C.L., L.A.K. and R.G.;
                                Investigation, N.E.H.M. and H.O.H.; Resources, N.E.H.M.; Data curation, R.G.; Writing—original
                                draft, N.E.H.M., I.B., M.Y. and H.O.H.; Writing—review & editing, J.-C.L., L.A.K., G.G. and R.G.;
                                Visualization, R.G.; Supervision, L.A.K., G.G. and R.G.. All authors have read and agreed to the
                                published version of the manuscript.
                                Funding: This work received funding from the Twinning European project: 952583—MICAfrica—
                                H2020-WIDESPREAD-2018-2020/H2020-WIDESPREAD-2020-5.
                                Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                Data Availability Statement: All the data used for this study (metagenomic data) are already pre-
                                sented in the Supplementary Data and available online.
                                Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
                                of the study, the analyses or interpretation of data, the writing of the manuscript, or the decision to
                                publish the results.
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742                                                                                                       11 of 13




References
1.    Xi, Y.; Xu, P. Global colorectal cancer burden in 2020 and projections to 2040. Transl. Oncol. 2021, 14, 101174. [CrossRef]
2.    Tilg, H.; Adolph, T.E.; Gerner, R.R.; Moschen, A.R. The intestinal microbiota in colorectal cancer. Cancer Cell 2018, 33, 954–964.
      [CrossRef]
3.    Wang, X.; Yang, Y.; Huycke, M.M. Commensal bacteria drive endogenous transformation and tumour stem cell marker expression
      through a bystander effect. Gut 2015, 64, 459–468. [CrossRef]
4.    Lucas, C.; Barnich, N.; Nguyen, H.T.T. Microbiota, inflammation and colorectal cancer. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1310. [CrossRef]
5.    Tjalsma, H.; Boleij, A.; Marchesi, J.R.; Dutilh, B.E. A bacterial driver–passenger model for colorectal cancer: Beyond the usual
      suspects. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2012, 10, 575–582. [CrossRef]
6.    Massimino, L.; Lovisa, S.; Lamparelli, L.A.; Danese, S.; Ungaro, F. Gut eukaryotic virome in colorectal carcinogenesis: Is that a
      trigger? Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 2021, 19, 16–28. [CrossRef]
7.    Emlet, C.; Ruffin, M.; Lamendella, R. Enteric virome and carcinogenesis in the gut. Dig. Dis. Sci. 2020, 65, 852–864. [CrossRef]
8.    Coker, O.O. Non-bacteria microbiome (virus, fungi, and archaea) in gastrointestinal cancer. In Microbiome in Gastrointestinal
      Cancer; Springer: Singapore, 2023; pp. 91–106.
9.    Kaźmierczak-Siedlecka, K.; Dvořák, A.; Folwarski, M.; Daca, A.; Przewłócka, K.; Makarewicz, W. Fungal gut microbiota dysbiosis
      and its role in colorectal, oral, and pancreatic carcinogenesis. Cancers 2020, 12, 1326. [CrossRef]
10.   Coker, O.O.; Nakatsu, G.; Dai, R.Z.; Wu, W.K.K.; Wong, S.H.; Ng, S.C.; Chan, F.K.L.; Sung, J.J.Y.; Yu, J. Enteric fungal microbiota
      dysbiosis and ecological alterations in colorectal cancer. Gut 2019, 68, 654–662. [CrossRef]
11.   Bang, C.; Schmitz, R.A. Archaea: Forgotten players in the microbiome. Emerg. Top. Life Sci. 2018, 2, 459–468.
12.   Guindo, C.O.; Drancourt, M.; Grine, G. Digestive tract methanodrome: Physiological roles of human micro-biota-associated
      methanogens. Microb. Pathog. 2020, 149, 104425. [CrossRef]
13.   Coker, O.O.; Wu, W.K.K.; Wong, S.H.; Sung, J.J.; Yu, J. Altered gut archaea composition and interaction with bacteria are associated
      with colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 2020, 159, 1459–1470. [CrossRef]
14.   Moissl-Eichinger, C.; Pausan, M.; Taffner, J.; Berg, G.; Bang, C.; Schmitz, R.A. Archaea are interactive components of complex
      microbiomes. Trends Microbiol. 2018, 26, 70–85. [CrossRef]
15.   Nkamga, V.D.; Henrissat, B.; Drancourt, M. Archaea: Essential inhabitants of the human digestive micro-biota. Hum. Microbiome J.
      2017, 3, 1–8. [CrossRef]
16.   Eckburg, P.B.; Lepp, P.W.; Relman, D.A. Archaea and their potential role in human disease. Infect. Immun. 2003, 71, 591–596.
      [CrossRef]
17.   Ochman, H.; Moran, N.A. Genes lost and genes found: Evolution of bacterial pathogenesis and symbiosis. Science 2001, 292,
      1096–1099. [CrossRef]
18.   Million, M.; Tidjani Alou, M.; Khelaifia, S.; Bachar, D.; Lagier, J.C.; Dione, N.; Brah, S.; Hugon, P.; Lombard, V.; Armougom, F.;
      et al. Increased gut redox and depletion of anaerobic and methanogenic prokaryotes in severe acute malnutrition. Sci. Rep. 2016,
      6, 26051. [CrossRef]
19.   Scanlan, P.D.; Shanahan, F.; Marchesi, J.R. Human methanogen diversity and incidence in healthy and diseased colonic groups
      using mcrA gene analysis. BMC Microbiol. 2008, 8, 79. [CrossRef]
20.   Grine, G.; Lotte, R.; Chirio, D.; Chevalier, A.; Raoult, D.; Drancourt, M.; Ruimy, R. Co-culture of Methanobrevibacter smithii with
      enterobacteria during urinary infection. eBioMedicine 2019, 43, 333–337. [CrossRef]
21.   Cai, M.; Kandalai, S.; Tang, X.; Zheng, Q. Contributions of human-associated archaeal metabolites to tumor microenvironment
      and carcinogenesis. Microbiol. Spectr. 2022, 10, e02367-21. [CrossRef]
22.   Rinke, C.; Schwientek, P.; Sczyrba, A.; Ivanova, N.N.; Anderson, I.J.; Cheng, J.F.; Darling, A.; Malfatti, S.; Swan, B.K.; Gies, E.A.;
      et al. Insights into the phylogeny and coding potential of microbial dark matter. Nature 2013, 499, 431–437. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.   Zhou, Z.; Liu, Y.; Anantharaman, K.; Li, M. The expanding Asgard archaea invoke novel insights into Tree of Life and eukaryoge-
      nesis. mLife 2022, 1, 374–381. [CrossRef]
24.   Baker, B.J.; De Anda, V.; Seitz, K.W.; Dombrowski, N.; Santoro, A.E.; Lloyd, K.G. Diversity, ecology and evolution of Archaea. Nat.
      Microbiol. 2020, 5, 887–900. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.   Dombrowski, N.; Lee, J.H.; Williams, T.A.; Offre, P.; Spang, A. Genomic diversity, lifestyles and evolutionary origins of DPANN
      archaea. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2019, 366, fnz008. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.   Burns, M.B.; Lynch, J.; Starr, T.K.; Knights, D.; Blekhman, R. Virulence genes are a signature of the microbiome in the colorectal
      tumor microenvironment. Genome Med. 2015, 7, 55. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.   Liu, Y.; Dai, M. Trimethylamine N-oxide generated by the gut microbiota is associated with vascular inflammation: New insights
      into atherosclerosis. Mediat. Inflamm. 2020, 2020, 4634172. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.   Murros, K.E. Hydrogen sulfide produced by gut bacteria may induce Parkinson’s disease. Cells 2022, 11, 978. [CrossRef]
29.   Feng, Q.; Liang, S.; Jia, H.; Stadlmayr, A.; Tang, L.; Lan, Z.; Zhang, D.; Xia, H.; Xu, X.; Jie, Z.; et al. Gut microbiome development
      along the colorectal adenoma-carcinoma sequence. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 6528. [CrossRef]
30.   Wirbel, J.; Pyl, P.T.; Kartal, E.; Zych, K.; Kashani, A.; Milanese, A.; Fleck, J.S.; Voigt, A.Y.; Palleja, A.; Ponnudurai, R.; et al.
      Meta-analysis of fecal metagenomes reveals global microbial signatures that are specific for colorectal cancer. Nat. Med. 2019, 25,
      679–689. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742                                                                                                        12 of 13




31.   Thomas, A.M.; Manghi, P.; Asnicar, F.; Pasolli, E.; Armanini, F.; Zolfo, M.; Beghini, F.; Manara, S.; Karcher, N.; Pozzi, C.; et al.
      Metagenomic analysis of colorectal cancer datasets identifies cross-cohort microbial diagnostic signatures and a link with choline
      degradation. Nat. Med. 2019, 25, 667–678. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.   Yachida, S.; Mizutani, S.; Shiroma, H.; Shiba, S.; Nakajima, T.; Sakamoto, T.; Watanabe, H.; Masuda, K.; Nishimoto, Y.; Kubo, M.;
      et al. Metagenomic and metabolomic analyses reveal distinct stage-specific phenotypes of the gut microbiota in colorectal cancer.
      Nat. Med. 2019, 25, 968–976. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.   Yu, J.; Feng, Q.; Wong, S.H.; Zhang, D.; yi Liang, Q.; Qin, Y.; Tang, L.; Zhao, H.; Stenvang, J.; Li, Y.; et al. Metagenomic analysis
      of fecal microbiome as a tool towards targeted non-invasive biomarkers for colorectal cancer. Gut 2017, 66, 70–78. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
34.   Dhakan, D.B.; Maji, A.; Sharma, A.K.; Saxena, R.; Pulikkan, J.; Grace, T.; Gomez, A.; Scaria, J.; Amato, K.R.; Sharma, V.K. The
      unique composition of Indian gut microbiome, gene catalogue, and associated fecal metabolome deciphered using multi-omics
      approaches. Gigascience 2019, 8, giz004. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.   Wood, D.E.; Salzberg, S.L. Kraken: Ultrafast metagenomic sequence classification using exact alignments. Genome Biol. 2014, 15,
      R46. [CrossRef]
36.   Li, D.; Liu, C.M.; Luo, R.; Sadakane, K.; Lam, T.W. MEGAHIT: An ultra-fast single-node solution for large and complex
      metagenomics assembly via succinct de Bruijn graph. Bioinformatics 2015, 31, 1674–1676. [CrossRef]
37.   Polunina, P.; Batut, B. Assembly of Metagenomic Sequencing Data (Galaxy Training Materials). Available online: https://
      training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/assembly/tutorials/metagenomics-assembly/tutorial.html (accessed on
      1 June 2023).
38.   Seemann, T. Prokka: Rapid prokaryotic genome annotation. Bioinformatics 2014, 30, 2068–2069. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.   Stojiljković, M. NumPy, SciPy, and Pandas: Correlation with Python. Available online: https://realpython.com/numpy-scipy-
      pandas-correlation-python/ (accessed on 9 June 2023).
40.   Kostic, A.D.; Chun, E.; Robertson, L.; Glickman, J.N.; Gallini, C.A.; Michaud, M.; Clancy, T.E.; Chung, D.C.; Lochhead, P.; Hold,
      G.L.; et al. Fusobacterium nucleatum potentiates intestinal tumorigenesis and modulates the tumor-immune microenvironment.
      Cell Host Microbe 2013, 14, 207–215. [CrossRef]
41.   Afgan, E.; Baker, D.; Batut, B.; Van Den Beek, M.; Bouvier, D.; Čech, M.; Chilton, J.; Clements, D.; Coraor, N.; Grüning, B.A.; et al.
      The Galaxy platform for accessible, reproducible and collaborative biomedical analyses: 2018 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018, 46,
      W537–W544. [CrossRef]
42.   Chong, J.; Liu, P.; Zhou, G.; Xia, J. Using MicrobiomeAnalyst for comprehensive statistical, functional, and meta-analysis of
      microbiome data. Nat. Protoc. 2020, 15, 799–821. [CrossRef]
43.   Gaci, N.; Borrel, G.; Tottey, W.; O’Toole, P.W.; Brugère, J.F. Archaea and the human gut: New beginning of an old story. World J
      Gastroenterol. 2014, 20, 16062. [CrossRef]
44.   Gupta, A.; Dhakan, D.B.; Maji, A.; Saxena, R.; PK, V.P.; Mahajan, S.; Pulikkan, J.; Kurian, J.; Gomez, A.M.; Scaria, J.; et al.
      Association of Flavonifractor plautii, a flavonoid-degrading bacterium, with the gut microbiome of colorectal cancer patients in
      India. MSystems 2019, 4, e00438-19. [CrossRef]
45.   Hansen, E.E.; Lozupone, C.A.; Rey, F.E.; Wu, M.; Guruge, J.L.; Narra, A.; Goodfellow, J.; Zaneveld, J.R.; McDonald, D.T.; Goodrich,
      J.A.; et al. Pan-genome of the dominant human gut-associated archaeon, Methanobrevibacter smithii, studied in twins. Proc. Natl.
      Acad. Sci. USA 2011, 108 (Suppl. S1), 4599–4606. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.   Hoshiyama, Y.; Sekine, T.; Sasaba, T. A case-control study of colorectal cancer and its relation to diet, cigarettes, and alcohol
      consumption in Saitama Prefecture, Japan. Tohoku J. Exp. Med. 1993, 171, 153–165. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.   Chottanapund, S.; Chamroonsawasdi, K.; Tunyasitthisundhorn, P.; Aekplakorn, W.; Silpasuwan, P.; Anantachoti, P.; Rojroong-
      wasinkul, N.; Damapong, S.; Sornpaisarn, B.; Rojanapithayakorn, W.; et al. Modifiable Factors and Colon Cancer Risk in Thai
      Population. Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev. 2021, 22, 37–43. [CrossRef]
48.   Yusof, A.S.; Isa, Z.M.; Shah, S.A. Perceptions of Malaysian colorectal cancer patients regarding dietary in-take: A qualitative
      exploration. Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev. 2013, 14, 1151–1154. [CrossRef]
49.   de Castro, I.; Mendo, S.; Caetano, T. Antibiotics from haloarchaea: What can we learn from comparative genomics? Mar. Biotechnol.
      2020, 22, 308–316. [CrossRef]
50.   Mathlouthi, N.E.H.; Ouamrou Hama, H.; Belguith, I.; Charfi, S.; Boudawara, T.; Lagier, J.C.; Ammar Keskes, L.; Grine, G.; Gdoura,
      R. Colorectal Cancer Archaeome: A Metagenomic Exploration, Tunisia. Curr. Issues Mol. Biol. 2023, 45, 7572–7581. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
51.   Tor, J.M.; Kashefi, K.; Lovley, D.R. Acetate oxidation coupled to Fe (III) reduction in hyperthermophilic microorganisms. Appl.
      Environ. Microbiol. 2001, 67, 1363–1365. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.   Ferro, S.; Azevedo-Silva, J.; Casal, M.; Côrte-Real, M.; Baltazar, F.; Preto, A. Characterization of acetate transport in colorectal
      cancer cells and potential therapeutic implications. Oncotarget 2016, 7, 70639–70653. [CrossRef]
53.   Bennett, B.D.; Gralnick, J.A. Mechanisms of toxicity by and resistance to ferrous iron in anaerobic systems. Free Radic. Biol. Med.
      2019, 140, 167–171. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.   Aggarwal, V.; Tuli, H.S.; Varol, A.; Thakral, F.; Yerer, M.B.; Sak, K.; Varol, M.; Jain, A.; Khan, M.A.; Sethi, G. Role of Reactive
      Oxygen Species in Cancer Progression: Molecular Mechanisms and Recent Advancements. Biomolecules 2019, 9, 735. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2742                                                                                                           13 of 13




55.   Golyshina, O.V.; Timmis, K.N. Ferroplasma and relatives, recently discovered cell wall-lacking archaea making a living in
      extremely acid, heavy metal-rich environments. Environ. Microbiol. 2005, 7, 1277–1288. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.   Widdel, F.; Schnell, S.; Heising, S.; Ehrenreich, A.; Assmus, B.; Schink, B. Ferrous iron oxidation by anoxygenic phototrophic
      bacteria. Nature 1993, 362, 834–836. [CrossRef]
57.   Meruane, G.; Vargas, T. Bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron by Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans in the pH range 2.5–7.0. Hydrometallurgy
      2003, 71, 149–158. [CrossRef]
58.   Mathlouthi, N.E.H.; Kriaa, A.; Keskes, L.A.; Rhimi, M.; Gdoura, R. Virulence Factors in Colorectal Cancer Metagenomes and
      Association of Microbial Siderophores with Advanced Stages. Microorganisms 2022, 10, 2365. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.   Aksan, A.; Farrag, K.; Aksan, S.; Schroeder, O.; Stein, J. Flipside of the coin: Iron deficiency and colorectal cancer. Front. Immunol.
      2021, 12, 644. [CrossRef]
60.   Baker, B.J.; Comolli, L.R.; Dick, G.J.; Hauser, L.J.; Hyatt, D.; Dill, B.D.; Land, M.L.; VerBerkmoes, N.C.; Hettich, R.L.; Banfield, J.F.
      Enigmatic, ultrasmall, uncultivated Archaea. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 8806–8811. [CrossRef]
61.   Golyshina, O.V.; Toshchakov, S.V.; Makarova, K.S.; Gavrilov, S.N.; Korzhenkov, A.A.; La Cono, V.; Arcadi, E.; Nechitaylo, T.Y.;
      Ferrer, M.; Kublanov, I.V.; et al. ‘ARMAN’archaea depend on association with eu-ryarchaeal host in culture and in situ. Nat.
      Commun. 2017, 8, 60. [CrossRef]
62.   Nesbo, C.L.; L’Haridon, S.; Stetter, K.O.; Doolittle, W.F. Phylogenetic analyses of two “archaeal” genes in Thermotoga maritima
      reveal multiple transfers between archaea and bacteria. Mol. Biol. Evol. 2001, 18, 362–375. [CrossRef]
63.   Chistoserdova, L.; Vorholt, J.A.; Thauer, R.K.; Lidstrom, M.E. C1 transfer enzymes and coenzymes linking methylotrophic bacteria
      and methanogenic Archaea. Science 1998, 281, 99–102. [CrossRef]
64.   Deng, Y.; Xu, H.; Su, Y.; Liu, S.; Xu, L.; Guo, Z.; Wu, J.; Cheng, C.; Feng, J. Horizontal gene transfer contributes to virulence and
      antibiotic resistance of Vibrio harveyi 345 based on complete genome sequence analysis. BMC Genom. 2019, 20, 761. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
65.   Péneau, C.; Imbeaud, S.; La Bella, T.; Hirsch, T.Z.; Caruso, S.; Calderaro, J.; Paradis, V.; Blanc, J.F.; Letouzé, E.; Nault, J.C.; et al.
      Hepatitis B virus integrations promote local and distant oncogenic driver alterations in hepatocellular carcinoma. Gut 2022, 71,
      616–626. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.   Bousali, M.; Papatheodoridis, G.; Paraskevis, D.; Karamitros, T. Hepatitis B virus DNA integration, chronic infections and
      hepatocellular carcinoma. Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1787. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.   Makarova, K.S.; Wolf, Y.I.; Koonin, E.V. Towards functional characterization of archaeal genomic dark matter. Biochem. Soc. Trans.
      2019, 47, 389–398. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68.   Krupovic, M.; Cvirkaite-Krupovic, V.; Iranzo, J.; Prangishvili, D.; Koonin, E.V. Viruses of archaea: Structural, functional,
      environmental and evolutionary genomics. Virus Res. 2018, 244, 181–193. [CrossRef]
69.   Watanabe, T.; Shima, S. MvhB-type polyferredoxin as an electron-transfer chain in putative redox-enzyme complexes. Chem. Lett.
      2021, 50, 353–360. [CrossRef]
70.   Holmes, M.L.; Dyall-Smith, M.L. Sequence and expression of a halobacterial β-galactosidase gene. Mol. Microbiol. 2000, 36,
      114–122. [CrossRef]
71.   Karakan, T.; Tuohy, K.M.; Janssen-van Solingen, G. Low-dose lactulose as a prebiotic for improved gut health and enhanced
      mineral absorption. Front. Nutr. 2021, 8, 672925. [CrossRef]
72.   Rothwell, J.A.; Bešević, J.; Dimou, N.; Breeur, M.; Murphy, N.; Jenab, M.; Wedekind, R.; Viallon, V.; Ferrari, P.; Achaintre, D.; et al.
      Circulating amino acid levels and colorectal cancer risk in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition and
      UK Biobank cohorts. BMC Med. 2023, 21, 80. [CrossRef]
73.   Gao, R.; Zhu, Y.; Kong, C.; Xia, K.; Li, H.; Zhu, Y.; Zhang, X.; Liu, Y.; Zhong, H.; Yang, R.; et al. Alterations, interactions, and
      diagnostic potential of gut bacteria and viruses in colorectal cancer. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2021, 11, 657867. [CrossRef]
74.   Routy, B.; Gopalakrishnan, V.; Daillère, R.; Zitvogel, L.; Wargo, J.A.; Kroemer, G. The gut microbiota influences anticancer
      immunosurveillance and general health. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 2018, 15, 382–396. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75.   Fessler, J.; Matson, V.; Gajewski, T.F. Exploring the emerging role of the microbiome in cancer immunotherapy. J. Immunother.
      Cancer 2019, 7, 108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
