             cancers
Article
Distinct Signatures of Tumor-Associated Microbiota and
Metabolome in Low-Grade vs. High-Grade Dysplastic Colon
Polyps: Inference of Their Role in Tumor Initiation
and Progression
Michela Giulia Clavenna 1,† , Marta La Vecchia 1,† , Marika Sculco 1 , Soni Joseph 1 , Elettra Barberis 2,3 ,
Elia Amede 2,3 , Marta Mellai 1,3 , Silvia Brossa 1 , Giulia Borgonovi 1 , Pietro Occhipinti 4 , Renzo Boldorini 1 ,
Elisa Robotti 5 , Barbara Azzimonti 1,3 , Elisa Bona 6 , Edoardo Pasolli 7,8 , Daniela Ferrante 2 ,
Marcello Manfredi 2,3 , Anna Aspesi 1,‡ and Irma Dianzani 1, *,‡

                                            1   Department of Health Sciences, Università del Piemonte Orientale, 28100 Novara, Italy;
                                                michela.clavenna@uniupo.it (M.G.C.); marta.lavecchia@uniupo.it (M.L.V.); marika.sculco@uniupo.it (M.S.);
                                                soni.joseph@uniupo.it (S.J.); marta.mellai@uniupo.it (M.M.); renzo.boldorini@med.uniupo.it (R.B.);
                                                barbara.azzimonti@med.uniupo.it (B.A.); anna.aspesi@med.uniupo.it (A.A.)
                                            2   Department of Translational Medicine, Università del Piemonte Orientale, 28100 Novara, Italy;
                                                elettra.barberis@uniupo.it (E.B.); elia.amede@uniupo.it (E.A.); daniela.ferrante@med.uniupo.it (D.F.);
                                                marcello.manfredi@uniupo.it (M.M.)
                                            3   Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune and Allergic Diseases, University of Piemonte Orientale,
                                                28100 Novara, Italy
                                            4   Department of Gastroenterology, “Maggiore della Carità” Hospital, 28100 Novara, Italy
                                            5   Department of Sciences and Technological Innovation, Università del Piemonte Orientale,
                                                15121 Alessandria, Italy; elisa.robotti@uniupo.it
                                            6   Department for Sustainable Development and Ecological Transition, Università del Piemonte Orientale,
                                                13100 Vercelli, Italy; elisa.bona@uniupo.it
                                            7   Department of Agricultural Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, 80055 Portici, Italy;
Citation: Clavenna, M.G.; La Vecchia,
                                                edoardo.pasolli@unina.it
M.; Sculco, M.; Joseph, S.; Barberis, E.;   8   Task Force on Microbiome Studies, University of Naples Federico II, 80055 Portici, Italy
Amede, E.; Mellai, M.; Brossa, S.;
                                            *   Correspondence: irma.dianzani@med.uniupo.it
Borgonovi, G.; Occhipinti, P.; et al.
                                            †   These authors contributed equally to this work.
Distinct Signatures of                      ‡   These authors are joint senior authors.
Tumor-Associated Microbiota and
Metabolome in Low-Grade vs.
                                            Simple Summary: A growing body of research has shown the connection between gut microbiota
High-Grade Dysplastic Colon Polyps:
                                            and colorectal cancer. However, most studies analyze fecal microbiota, which do not reliably represent
Inference of Their Role in Tumor
                                            the bacterial populations associated with colon mucosa. We analyzed the microbiota and metabolome
Initiation and Progression. Cancers
                                            directly collected from the surface of colon polyps, and showed different bacterial and metabolite
2023, 15, 3065. https://doi.org/
10.3390/cancers15123065
                                            signatures that discriminate between patients with low- and high-grade dysplastic polyps. We
                                            identified bacterial genera and species that are enriched in the early stages of tumor development and
Academic Editor: M. Canan Arkan
                                            may act as drivers of carcinogenesis. Moreover, we revealed that differences in metabolite profiles
Received: 20 April 2023                     accompanied the changes in bacterial composition associated with tumor stage, and that gut bacteria
Revised: 31 May 2023                        are involved in the production and consumption of significantly altered metabolites. Our findings
Accepted: 1 June 2023                       pave the way for future mechanistic investigations to elucidate the role of specific bacteria in colon
Published: 6 June 2023                      carcinogenesis and to design preventative measures based on microbiota modulation.

                                            Abstract: According to the driver–passenger model for colorectal cancer (CRC), the tumor-associated
                                            microbiota is a dynamic ecosystem of bacterial species where bacteria with carcinogenic features
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
                                            linked to CRC initiation are defined as “drivers”, while opportunistic bacteria colonizing more
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                            advanced tumor stages are known as “passengers”. We reasoned that also gut microbiota-associated
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
                                            metabolites may be differentially enriched according to tumor stage, and be potential determinants
conditions of the Creative Commons          of CRC development. Thus, we characterized the mucosa- and lumen-associated microbiota (MAM
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://       and LAM, respectively) and mucosa-associated metabolites in low- vs. high-grade dysplastic colon
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/            polyps from 78 patients. We show that MAM, obtained with a new biopsy-preserving approach, and
4.0/).                                      LAM differ in composition and α/β-diversity. By stratifying patients for polyp histology, we found




Cancers 2023, 15, 3065. https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15123065                                                https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cancers
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                               2 of 21




                         that bacteria proposed as passengers by previous studies colonized high-grade dysplastic adenomas,
                         whereas driver taxa were enriched in low-grade polyps. Furthermore, we report altered “mucosa-
                         associated metabolite” levels in low- vs. high-grade groups. Integrated microbiota-metabolome
                         analysis suggests the involvement of the gut microbiota in the production and consumption of these
                         metabolites. Altogether, our findings support the involvement of bacterial species and associated
                         metabolites in CRC mucosal homeostasis in a tumor-stage-specific manner. These distinct signatures
                         may be used to distinguish low-grade from high-grade dysplastic polyps.

                         Keywords: mucosa-associated microbiota; lumen-associated microbiota; microbiota-derived
                         metabolites; gut; colon polyp; colorectal cancer; driver bacteria; passenger bacteria




                         1. Introduction
                               Colorectal cancer (CRC) is among the most prevalent cancers worldwide, with more
                         than 1.9 million cases and 935,000 deaths in 2020 [1]. Its multifactorial etiology includes ge-
                         netic, environmental, and life-style factors. In most cases, CRC develops from adenomatous
                         polyps, which show different grades of dysplasia during tumor progression.
                               Mounting evidence indicates that changes in the gut microbiota play an important
                         role in colon carcinogenesis [2].
                               The bacterial driver–passenger model for CRC proposes that bacterial species have
                         distinct temporal associations with colorectal tissues according to their role in CRC patho-
                         genesis [3–5]. Driver bacteria are found in the initial stages of carcinogenesis and are,
                         therefore, thought to play a role in CRC initiation by different mechanisms: production
                         of genotoxic substances, disruption of the function of tumor suppressor proteins, such as
                         E-cadherin, production of metabolites that increase the proliferation of enterocytes and
                         opportunistic microbial pathogens, and induction and maintenance of the inflammatory
                         process [3,4,6]. Passenger bacteria are instead opportunistic pathogens involved in CRC
                         progression [3,7]. One of the most studied driver bacteria is the enterotoxigenic strain of
                         Bacteroides fragilis (ETBF) that can facilitate the initiation of pre-malignant lesions through
                         the release of enterotoxins (BFTs) [3]. The epithelial response to B. fragilis toxins induces
                         E-cadherin cleavage, resulting in enhanced barrier permeability, Wnt/β-catenin, and NF-κB
                         signaling [8]. Importantly, tumor-susceptible mice (ApcMin/+ ) colonized by ETBF strains
                         are used as a model of microbial-induced colon tumorigenesis [9]. Another example of
                         driver bacteria is represented by Escherichia coli strains harboring the polyketide synthase
                         (PKS) genomic island and capable of synthesizing the genotoxic virulence factor colibactin,
                         which induces double-strand DNA breaks [10].
                               Given that the tumor microenvironment (TME) changes during the oncogenic process,
                         pathogenic driver bacteria can be numerically overwhelmed and gradually replaced by
                         passenger bacteria that acquire a growth advantage in the tumor context. These opportunis-
                         tic pathogens, which otherwise would not be able to colonize healthy colorectal tissues,
                         exploit the altered metabolism of the tumor colonocytes to proliferate [3,4]. Passenger
                         bacteria may also be actively involved in cancer progression, though their relevance is still
                         unclear [3,4,11].
                               Another mechanism through which microbiota can influence CRC development is the
                         production of various metabolites [12,13]. It is, in fact, widely accepted that microbiota-
                         derived metabolites play a crucial role in host physiology and disease development, and
                         that their abundances may vary according to tumor stage. Among the most heavily
                         studied microbiota-derived metabolites in CRC, are short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and
                         bile acids (BAs) [14]. In particular, deoxycholic acid, which is a secondary bile acid, can
                         cause inflammation and promote intestinal tumorigenesis in ApcMin/+ mice [15]. Bile acid
                         is involved in tumor progression through the activation of the NF-κB pathway, which
                         promotes cell growth and survival [16]. Moreover, gut-associated metabolites may directly
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                          3 of 21




                         alter the gut microbiota composition by promoting the proliferation of specific bacteria, in
                         particular that of passengers [17].
                               A number of studies have performed integrated analyses on lumen-associated mi-
                         crobiota (LAM) and metabolome from fecal or serum samples to characterize the role of
                         bacteria and associated metabolites in the pathogenesis of CRC [18–20]. However, data are
                         scant on gut mucosa-associated microbiota (MAM) and mucosa-associated metabolome.
                               The emerging consensus is that the composition of gut MAM differs from that of LAM,
                         with only a few species being present in both compartments [21–25].
                               Based on the aforementioned evidence, the aim of this study was to characterize
                         the temporal association of MAM and their metabolites with low-grade vs. high-grade
                         dysplastic colon polyps—which represent two distinct stages of the adenoma–carcinoma
                         sequence—and to ascertain their role in neoplastic development. For this purpose, we have
                         devised a new technique that allows the collection of bacteria and metabolites from the
                         adenoma’s surface without jeopardizing tissue integrity.
                               The analysis of MAM and mucosal-associated metabolome, according to the histologi-
                         cal classification of colon polyps, reveals the preponderance of potential driver bacteria in
                         low-grade dysplastic polyps, while potential passenger bacteria are enriched in high-grade
                         dysplastic ones. The bacteria classification is based on previous reports, where candidate
                         drivers or passengers were proposed [3,4], albeit no functional experiments were performed
                         to show that these bacteria play a direct role in malignancy. We also report differences
                         in the metabolite relative abundances between the two study groups, suggesting that
                         these signatures may be used to distinguish colon polyps according to histology. Finally,
                         integrated analysis of MAM and metabolites shows either positive or negative correlations
                         between enriched bacteria and specific classes of metabolites, supporting the involvement
                         of the gut microbiota in the production and consumption of these metabolites.

                         2. Materials and Methods
                         2.1. Patients Enrollment
                              Patients (n = 78, males = 45; females = 33) were recruited before colonoscopy at the
                         Gastroenterology Unit of Maggiore della Carità University Hospital (Novara, Italy). All the
                         patients undergoing colonoscopy signed an informed consent form. After colonoscopy, only
                         patients with polyps larger than 10 mm, older than 18 years were included in this study.
                         The other exclusion criteria were prebiotic, probiotic or antibiotic consumption within
                         one month before fecal sample (LAM) collection. Previous gastro-intestinal conditions
                         that could modify the gut microbiota were evaluated, including diverticula, cholecystec-
                         tomy and previous polyp occurrence and reported in Tables 1 and S1. All the patients
                         used laxatives before colonoscopy, as required by the procedure. A team that includes
                         13 medical operators of the same Unit, all using the same working procedures, per-
                         formed all the colonoscopies, and a single nurse collected all the microbiome and the
                         metabolome samples.

                         2.2. Sample Collection
                              To collect MAM and associated metabolites, e-NAT™ (COPAN, Brescia, Italy) swabs
                         or dry swabs, respectively, were used to gently brush the polyp surfaces without compro-
                         mising their tissue integrity. Samples were stored at −80 ◦ C until 16S rRNA tag sequencing
                         and metabolite extraction. Bowel preparation could alter gut microbiota and metabolome
                         composition [26]. Nagata and colleagues in 2019 showed that after 14 days, both microbiota
                         and metabolome are completely restored [27]. Therefore, for LAM analyses, fecal samples
                         were collected from the patients 14 days after colonoscopy, aliquoted and stored at −80 ◦ C
                         until microbial DNA isolation and sequencing.
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                                              4 of 21




                               Table 1. Clinical features of the patients. Statistically significant p-values (p < 0.05) are in bold.

                                                       Patients with                            Patients with
                                  Patients
         Clinical Features                       Low-Grade Dysplastic Polyps             High-Grade Dysplastic Polyps           p-Value
                                 n = 78 (%)
                                                         n = 44 (%)                               n = 34 (%)
 Gender
 Female                          33 (42.3%)                  21 (47.7%)                             12 (35.3%)
                                                                                                                                  0.3
 Male                            45 (57.7%)                  23 (52.3%)                             22 (64.7%)
 BMI (body mass index)
 Normal weight                   34 (43.6%)                  20 (45.4%)                             14 (41.2%)
                                                                                                                                  0.7
 Overweight or obese             44 (56.4%)                  24 (54.6%)                             20 (58.8%)
 Age
 Median (IQR)                    61 (58–70)                  61 (58–68)                             62 (56–70)                    0.9
 Polyp size mm
 Median (IQR)                    14 (10–23)                  12 (10–16)                             15 (12–25)                    0.02
 Type of polyp
 Tubular                         28 (35.9%)                  21 (47.7%)                              7 (20.6%)
 Villous                          3 (3.8%)                    1 (2.3%)                               2 (5.9%)
                                                                                                                                 0.005
 Tubulo-villous                  40 (51.3%)                  16 (36.4%)                             24 (70.6%)
 Others                           7 (9.0%)                   6 (13.6%)                               1 (2.9%)
 Previous gastrointestinal
 conditions
 Diverticulitis                  26 (33.3%)                  19 (43.2%)                              7 (20.6%)
 Previous polyp occurrence        8 (10.2%)                   6 (13.6%)                               2 (5.9%)
 IBD                              1 (1.3%)                         0                                 1 (2.9%)                     0.2
 Previous cholecystectomy          5 (6.4%)                    4 (9.1%)                               1 (2.9%)
 Slight mucosal inflammation       1 (1.3%)                        0                                  1 (2.9%)
 Polyp localization
 Right colon                     18 (23.1%)                  11 (25.0%)                             7 (20.6%)
 Left colon                      52 (66.7%)                  28 (63.6%)                             24 (70.6%)                    0.8
 Transversal colon                8 (10.2%)                   5 (11.4%)                              3 (8.8%)
                               BMI: body mass index; IQR: interquartile range; IBD: inflammatory bowel disease.


                                    Patient nutritional habits were evaluated with the validated European Prospective
                               Investigation into Cancer and nutrition (EPIC) questionnaire on nutrition [28]. The ques-
                               tionnaire is composed of 16 categories and questions about 266 different items, including
                               simple foods and recipes, to understand the food frequency intake. The questionnaire was
                               completed online and analyzed, and the intake frequency was transformed in grams/day.
                               We analyzed and compared the consumption of the most important nutrients in low- vs.
                               high-grade dysplasia groups (Table S2).

                               2.3. Histology
                                    After removal, polyps were included in neutral buffered formalin for at least 24 h
                               and then included in paraffin. Sections were cut at 4-µm thickness and stained using
                               hematoxylin-eosin. Polyps were oriented using a stereo microscope and cut alongside
                               the major axis, identifying, if possible, the base implant. All polyps (i.e., tubular, vil-
                               lous, tubulovillous, sessile-serrated) were evaluated by an expert pathologist (R.B.) at the
                               University Hospital Pathology Unit in Novara, Italy. Patients with low-grade dysplas-
                               tic adenomas were included in the “low-grade” group, while patients with high-grade
                               dysplastic adenomas were included in the “high-grade” group (Table 1).

                               2.4. MAM and LAM Analyses
                                  Microbial DNA for MAM analyses were extracted from e-NAT™ swabs with QIAamp®
                               DNA Microbiome kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                             5 of 21




                               LAM analyses were performed on microbial DNA extracted from fecal samples us-
                         ing QIAamp® PowerFecal® Pro DNA kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), according to the
                         manufacturer’s instructions. The yield and quality of microbial DNA was determined
                         using a NanoDrop™ 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA,
                         USA). The quantity was assessed with Invitrogen™ Qubit™ 1X dsDNA HS Assay Kit
                         (Invitrogen Co., Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) using a Qubit 4 fluorometer (Invitrogen).
                               To avoid contaminations, microbial DNA extraction for MAM and LAM was per-
                         formed in sterile conditions, using a laminar flow cabinet and sterile reagents and materials.
                         E-NAT™ swabs not brushed on any tissue were used as negative controls for microbial
                         DNA extraction and 16S rRNA sequencing.
                               MAM and LAM samples were subjected to 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing analysis
                         using Microbiota Solution B Kit, a next-generation sequencing (NGS) in vitro molecular test,
                         CE-IVD marked (Arrow Diagnostics Srl, Genoa, Italy). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
                         amplification of the V3-V4-V6 hypervariable regions of bacterial 16S rRNA was obtained
                         by using the patented degenerate primer sets within the Arrow Microbiota Solution B
                         kit (cod. AD-002.024), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. PCR products were
                         purified using Agencourt AMPure XP magnetic beads (Beckman Coulter Inc., Brea, CA,
                         USA), and indexes were added in a subsequent step. The hypervariable V3-V4-V6 regions
                         of the bacterial 16S rRNA were amplified according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
                               The DNA concentration of the libraries was fluorometrically measured and samples
                         were pooled in equimolar concentrations. The final 16S rRNA amplicon libraries were
                         sequenced on a MiSeq Illumina® sequencing platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA)
                         using a MiSeq Reagent Nano Kit v2 cartridge for a 2 × 250 paired-end sequencing.

                         2.5. Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt)
                              Functional abundances were predicted using the Phylogenetic Investigation of Com-
                         munities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt2) software 2.0 [29]. Pathways
                         differentially abundant between low- and high-grade dysplastic polyps were detected
                         using the STAMP software [30]. Pathways with p-value < 0.05 were identified as sig-
                         nificant after false discovery rate (FDR) correction. We consulted the MetaCyc website
                         (https://metacyc.org/, accessed on 26 September 2022) to identify the products of each
                         pathway which emerged from the PICRUSt analysis.

                         2.6. Mucosa-Associated Metabolome
                                Small molecules were extracted and analyzed as reported in our previous validated
                         method [31]. Briefly, short chain fatty acid (SCFA) extraction from dry swabs was performed
                         first using water and sonication and then liquid-liquid extraction with methyl tert-butyl
                         ether (MTBE). Methanol-isopropanol-acetonitrile was then used to extract other metabolites
                         (i.e., amino acids, sugars, long fatty acids, and medium fatty acids) from the aqueous phase.
                         The internal standards deuterated propanoic acid (1 ppm), tridecanoic acid (0.5 ppm)
                         and hexadecane (1 ppm) were also added. SCFAs and small molecules were analyzed
                         by bidimensional gas chromatography mass spectrometry GCXGC/TOFMS (BT 4D, Leco
                         Corp., St. Josef, MI, USA), as described in our previous work [31]. The samples were
                         analyzed using both targeted and untargeted approaches. Briefly, SCFAs were quantified
                         using a targeted analysis performed with internal standards and external calibration curves,
                         as previously reported [31]. For the untargeted analysis, peaks with signal-to-noise (S/N)
                         value lower than 500.0 were rejected. ChromaTOF version 5.31 was used for raw data
                         processing and mass spectral assignment was performed by matching with NIST MS Search
                         2.3 libraries adding Fiehn Library. Identification of molecules was also performed using an
                         in-house library built with commercial mix standards that contain hundreds of molecules.
                         As the polyp mean area was different between the low- and high-grade dysplasia groups
                         (median (IQR) 12 (10–16) mm vs. 15 (12–25) mm; p-value ≤ 0.05), normalization was
                         performed by dividing the metabolites’ abundances by the value of the area of each
                         analyzed polyp, with the limit of the type and shape of the polyps. Measurements were
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                          6 of 21




                         performed at the time of colonoscopy with graph paper. The internal standards that
                         were spiked in each sample, were used for instrument stability monitoring and data
                         normalization. In addition, small molecule levels from untargeted analysis were also
                         normalized by total sum of abundances. To study a possible correlation between polyp-
                         associated microbiota and its metabolites, the metabolome analysis was integrated with
                         MAM using M2 IA, an open-source web server. The hierarchical clustering heat map
                         analysis was performed through MetaboAnalyst software 5.0 (www.metaboanalyst.ca,
                         accessed on 17 December 2021) using the Euclidean distance as distance measure and the
                         Ward method as clustering method. Only modulated metabolites (p-value < 0.05 and fold
                         change > 1.3 or <0.769) were used. Metabolomics data are shown in Table S3.

                         2.7. Raw Sequence Processing
                               Raw sequences obtained from MAM and LAM DNA were processed using the soft-
                         ware MicrobAT Suite v1.2.1 (SmartSeq srl, Novara, Italy), based on the Ribosomal Database
                         Project (RDP) database. MicrobAT (SmartSeq s.r.l.) is a standalone software based on
                         client/server system. Through a graphical interface developed in Java, the user can load
                         the FASTQ files, download the raw data of the analysis and print the reports of the sam-
                         ples. The first step is a cleaning of the reads obtained from the FASTQ file using custom
                         algorithms that remove the short sequences (read length < 200 nt) and sequences with
                         a low quality (average Phred quality score [32] < 25). High-quality sequences are then
                         aligned with the reference database, i.e., RDP database release 11-update 5 [33]. During
                         this taxonomic assignment process, only the reads with minimum sequence length that
                         align with reference ≥80% and similarity threshold ≥97% were associated, by the analysis
                         system, with the species taxonomic level. Finally, the software generates absolute abun-
                         dance tables and three files (OTU, taxonomy, metadata) used as input for the subsequent
                         analyses [34,35].
                               Statistical analysis regarding variations within the bacterial communities was per-
                         formed using MicrobiomeAnalyst software 1.0 (Comprehensive Statistical, Visual, and
                         Meta-Analysis of Microbiome data) [36].
                               Firstly, a data integrity check was performed by the online software to show the
                         information collected. Secondly, taxa having zero reads across all the samples or appearing
                         in only one sample were removed by default. Finally, a low-count filter was applied to
                         remove taxa containing less than 30 (LAM vs. MAM comparison) or 10 reads (low- vs.
                         high-grade dysplasia comparison) in at least 20% of samples.

                         2.8. Statistical Analysis
                              Fisher’s exact test was used to compare the groups, as reported in Table 1.
                              Heat tree analysis was used to compare statistically significant differences between the
                         groups, i.e., MAM vs. LAM, low- vs. high-grade dysplastic polyps. This method, performed
                         through R metacoder package [37], uses hierarchical structure of taxonomic classifications
                         to quantitatively (median abundance) and statistically (non-parametric Wilcoxon Rank
                         Sum test) depict taxon differences among communities, using color and size of nodes.
                              To compare MAM with LAM, data were summarized using α- or β-diversity indexes.
                         Three α-diversity metrics were used: the observed number, the Shannon index, and the
                         Simpson index. The first index evaluates the number of unique taxa observed in each
                         sample, considering only richness. The last two are based on not only richness but also
                         evenness, which represents the abundance of a given microorganism. We performed α-
                         diversity analysis using the phyloseq package [38], and results were plotted across samples
                         and depicted as box plots for each group.
                              Beta diversity analysis, used to compare the different composition between the analysis
                         groups, was calculated by Bray–Curtis distance, and the results were visualized in two
                         plots through principal coordinate analysis (PCoA). In the plots, each point represents
                         the entire microbiome of a single sample. The statistical significance of the differences in
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                             7 of 21




                         β-diversity between groups (MAM vs. LAM; low- vs. high-grade dysplastic polyps) was
                         evaluated using permutational ANOVA (PERMANOVA).
                              Linear discriminant analysis effect size (LDA-LEfSe) was used to identify signatures
                         at different taxonomic levels, characterizing each different group (MAM vs. LAM, low-
                         vs. high-grade dysplastic polyps). This method estimates both statistical significance and
                         biological consistency (effect size). Firstly, it uses the Kruskal–Wallis sum-rank test to
                         identify taxa that are statistically different between groups. Subsequently, LEfSe applies
                         LDA to calculate the effect size of each differentially abundant feature. Features with
                         p < 0.05 and an LDA score > or <2 were considered taxa able to discriminate between the
                         two groups. For mucosal-adherent and luminal microbiota comparison, the false discovery
                         rate (FDR) was used to correct for multiple testing, and taxa with p-values < 0.05 were
                         considered statistically significant. The p-values adjusted for the FDR are indicated as
                         q-values.
                              For the correlation analyses between polyp-associated microbiota and metabolites,
                         Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient was calculated using the M2 IA web server with
                         default settings.

                         3. Results
                         3.1. Characterization of LAM and MAM in Patients with Colon Polyps
                              Contrary to other sample collection protocols that cause the degradation of the biop-
                         sies to obtain microbiota and metabolites, we have developed a new approach that al-
                         lows us to analyze the microbiota and metabolome adherent to the polyp surface with-
                         out compromising the integrity of the biopsies, a key requisite to perform an accurate
                         histological analysis.
                              Seventy-eight patients (45 males, 33 females) with polyps larger than 10 mm were
                         recruited before colonoscopy at the Gastroenterology Unit of the University Hospital
                         Maggiore della Carità in Novara, Italy. The clinical features of this study population are
                         shown in Table 1. We did not find any statistically significant difference between low- and
                         high-grade groups regarding previous gastro-intestinal conditions and polyp localization
                         (Table 1). Since diet can influence the gut microbiota composition, we compared nutrient
                         consumption between patients with low- and high-grade dysplastic polyps. We did not
                         find any statistically significant difference in the daily consumption of fiber, lipids, red and
                         processed meat, fruit and vegetables, as shown in Table S2.
                              MAM samples were collected by gently brushing the surface of the resected polyp
                         with an e-NATTM swab, which allows the preservation of the nucleic acids until extraction,
                         whereas LAM-containing specimens were isolated from feces using a standard approach
                         (see Methods). Subsequently, MAM and LAM samples were subjected to 16S rRNA se-
                         quencing, yielding an average number of reads of 53,028.73 and 67,479.96, respectively.
                         After applying a low-count filter to remove taxa showing less than 10 reads, we obtained
                         165 taxa from the MAM samples and 202 from the LAM ones. These genomic sequences
                         were included in the BioProject MIMEC Project_Swab PRJNA783496 and MIMEC Project_
                         Fecal PRJNA783535 available in the NCBI database https://submit.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/subs/
                         sra/SUB11427238/overview, accessed on 17 December 2021 and https://submit.ncbi.nlm.
                         nih.gov/subs/sra/SUB11420448/overview, accessed on 17 December 2021, respectively. The
                         α-diversity indexes—which include the observed number (Figure 1a), the Shannon (Figure 1b)
                         and the Simpson (Figure 1c) indexes—show that LAM is characterized by a significantly
                         higher mean species diversity than that of MAM (p < 0.05).
                         (Verrucomicrobiota) (1.72% vs. 1.00%) (p < 0.05) (Figure S1a,b). Conversely, MAM displays
                         a phylum enrichment of Proteobacteria (Pseudomonadota) (15.91% vs. 2.52%) and Actino-
                         bacteria (Actinomycetota) (11.79% vs. 6.27%) (Figure S1a,b). The two groups (MAM vs.
                         LAM) show statistically significant differences at phylum, class, order (Figure S1c–e), and
                         at family and genus level (Figure 1e,f).
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                                     8 of 21




                         Figure 1. Box plots showing three different α-diversity indexes tested by Wilcoxon rank sum test.
                         (a) The observed index is a richness-based measure showing the number of unique taxa present
                          Figure
                         in       1. Box plots
                             each sample.   Theshowing
                                                box plotthree
                                                         showsdifferent  α-diversity
                                                                the difference       indexes species
                                                                                in observed   tested by Wilcoxon
                                                                                                      between   MAM          test.
                                                                                                                         sumand
                                                                                                                   rank(red)
                          (a) The observed index is a richness-based   measure   showing   the number   of unique taxa present in
                         LAM (blue) samples (p = 1.17 × 10−4 ). (b,c) Shannon and Simpson indexes are based on richness
                         (i.e., numbers of species) and evenness (i.e., abundance of microorganisms). The two different
                         box plots show significant differences between MAM (red) and LAM (blue) samples (Shannon:
                         p = 3.49 × 10−10 , Simpson: p = 1.05 × 10−11 ). (d) β-diversity analysis shows a significant separation
                         between MAM (red) and LAM (blue) samples (p < 0.001). Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA),
                         based on Bray–Curtis distance matrix, shows the different microbial composition between the two
                         groups. This is achieved by comparing the changes in presence/absence or abundance of thousands
                         of species and by summarizing how “similar” or “dissimilar” they are. The X-axis explains 23.9%
                         of the variability between samples, while the Y-axis explains 14.3%. The statistical significance of
                         the clustering pattern was calculated using permutational ANOVA (PERMANOVA). (e,f) Linear
                         discriminant analysis effect size (LDA-LEfSe) showing families (e) and genera (f) enriched in LAM
                         (blue, on the right, LDA-score > 3) or MAM (red, on the left, LDA-score < −3).

                              Next, we assessed the β-diversity indexes of MAM vs. LAM by principal coordinates
                         analysis (PCoA) using the Bray–Curtis distance matrix. As shown in Figure 1d, LAM
                         displays a tighter clustering compared to that of MAM. The statistical significance of the
                         clustering pattern was confirmed by permutational ANOVA (PERMANOVA)
                         (p < 0.001, Figure 1d).
                              Compared to MAM, LAM shows a phylum enrichment of Firmicutes (Bacillota)
                         (51.30% vs. 39.03%), Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidota) (22.03% vs. 7.30%), and Verrucomi-
                         crobia (Verrucomicrobiota) (1.72% vs. 1.00%) (p < 0.05) (Figure S1a,b). Conversely, MAM
                         displays a phylum enrichment of Proteobacteria (Pseudomonadota) (15.91% vs. 2.52%) and
                         Actinobacteria (Actinomycetota) (11.79% vs. 6.27%) (Figure S1a,b). The two groups (MAM
                         vs. LAM) show statistically significant differences at phylum, class, order (Figure S1c–e),
                         and at family and genus level (Figure 1e,f).
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                                                      9 of 21




                                        LDA LEfSe analysis was carried out to identify the bacterial genera that were enriched
                                   in the LAM or MAM samples (Table S4). In agreement with the phylum results, all genera
                                   included in the Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidota) and Verrucomicrobia phyla and most genera
                                   included in the Firmicutes phylum (Bacillota) are significantly enriched (p < 0.05) in LAM
                                   compared with MAM, whereas most genera included in Proteobacteria (Pseudomonadota)
                                   and Actinobacteria (Actinomycetota) are more abundant in MAM samples (Table S4).
                                        Overall, these data suggest that patients’ MAM differs from LAM, possibly because
                                   MAM is more related to the localized changes occurring near the polyps and more depen-
                                   dent of tumor stage, while LAM is representative of all bacterial species present in the gut.
                                   Thus, even though LAM has a higher number of species (α-diversity), most of these latter
                                   are shared among patients regardless of tumor stage.

                                   3.2. Identification of Mucosa-Associated Bacterial Signatures Distinguishing Low-Grade from
                                   High-Grade Dysplastic Colorectal Polyps
                                            Since bacteria in close contact with enterocytes may play an important role in colon
                                     carcinogenesis, we focused our attention on polyp-associated microbiota. In particular, we
                                     asked whether the MAM characterizing low-grade dysplastic polyps would be enriched
                                     in driver bacteria, which influence the initial stages of carcinogenesis, whereas MAM of
                                     high-grade dysplastic polyps would be enriched in passenger species.
                                            By stratifying patients according to histology (low-grade vs. high-grade dysplasia), we
                                     identified two genera (Pelomonas and Phascolarctobacterium) enriched in low-grade, while the
                                     potential passenger genus Anaerococcus [4] was enriched in high-grade dysplastic polyps
                                     (Figure 2a). Moreover, we found the potential driver species, Bacteroides fragilis [3] and five
                                     other species (i.e., Bacteroides spp., Beta proteobacterium, unclassified Phascolarctobacterium,
                                     unclassified Erysipelotrichaceae incertae sedis, and Phascolarctobacterium faecium) enriched
                                     in low-grade dysplastic polyps (p < 0.05), whereas the two potential passenger species,
                                     unclassified Anaerococcus and Streptococcus anginosus [4], were enriched in high-grade
                                     dysplastic polyps (Figure 2b). Thus, as we hypothesized, known candidate driver taxa are
                         Cancers 2023,only
                                       15, x FOR PEER in
                                             enriched REVIEW
                                                         MAM of low-grade dysplastic polyps, while known candidate passenger
                                     taxa are only enriched in MAM of high-grade dysplastic polyps. It must be considered that
                                     candidate driver or passenger classification is based on previously suggested classifications,
                                     lacking validation by functional experiments.




                                   Figure 2. Linear discriminant analysis effect size (LDA-LEfSe) showing (a) bacterial genera and
                                   (b) species enriched in MAM high- (yellow, LDA score > 2) vs. low-grade dysplastic adenomas (green,
                                   LDA score < −2). This method incorporates statistical significance (Kruskal–Wallis) with biological
                                                           Figure 2. Linear discriminant analysis effect size (LDA-LEfSe) showing (a) bacterial gene
                                   consistency (effect size).  The length
                                                           species  enrichedof the bar represents
                                                                               in MAM                a log10
                                                                                          high- (yellow,      transformed
                                                                                                            LDA               LDA
                                                                                                                  score > 2) vs.    score. This
                                                                                                                                  low-grade     value adenom
                                                                                                                                             dysplastic
                                   is positive if the bacterial species is enriched   in  the first compared    to  the second   group  and  negative
                                                           LDA score < −2). This method incorporates statistical significance (Kruskal–Wallis) with
                                   if the second group shows      enrichment
                                                           consistency          compared
                                                                         (effect size). The to   the of
                                                                                             length  first group. A
                                                                                                        the bar       significance
                                                                                                                 represents   a log10level of p < 0.05
                                                                                                                                      transformed   LDA score.
                                   and an LDA score of 2isare positive
                                                                 used if
                                                                       to the bacterialthe
                                                                          determine      species  is best
                                                                                            species  enriched in   the first each
                                                                                                           characterizing    compared   to the second group an
                                                                                                                                   phenotype.
                                                           if the second group shows enrichment compared to the first group. A significance level
                                                           and an LDA score of 2 are used to determine the species best characterizing each phenot

                                                               Similar differences in MAM between low- and high-grade dysplastic pol
                                                           observed by analyzing the phylogenetic heat tree (Figure S2).
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                              10 of 21




                             Similar differences in MAM between low- and high-grade dysplastic polyps were
                         observed by analyzing the phylogenetic heat tree (Figure S2).
                             It is noteworthy that the analysis of LAM also revealed different signatures for genera
                         and species in high- and low- grade dysplastic groups (Figure S3).

                         3.3. Comparison of Mucosa-Associated Metabolome between High-Grade and Low-Grade
                         Dysplastic Colorectal Polyps
                               Next, we asked whether there was an association between tumor stage and the com-
                         position of the mucosa-associated metabolome. To answer this question, we identified the
                         metabolome adherent to the polyps through a high-throughput metabolomics approach
                         recently described by our group [31]. Of note, metabolites in the gut can derive from
                         bacteria, endogenous compounds, or exogenous dietary components [39–41].
                               Metabolome analysis of 59 (34 low- vs. 25 high-grade) out of 78 patients (19 samples
                         were unavailable) uncovered 41 metabolites that allowed us to distinguish between high-
                         and low-grade dysplastic polyps (fold change, FC > 1.3 enriched in high-grade or FC < 0.769
                         depleted in high-grade; p < 0.05). In high-grade polyps, we found a higher concentration
                         of SCFAs, such as butyric acid (FC = 3.7; p < 0.05) and isobutyric acid (FC = 3.5; p < 0.05),
                         lactic acid (FC = 1.9; p < 0.05), the nucleobase uracil (FC = 3.6; p < 0.01), and several amino
                         acids, such as threonine (FC = 8.2; p < 0.01), serine (FC = 2.8; p < 0.05), α-aminobutanoic
                         acid (FC = 5.6; p < 0.05). Other differentially abundant metabolites included erythronic acid
                         (FC = 0.7; p < 0.05), L-threitol (FC = 1.9; p < 0.05), pyroglutamic acid (FC = 4.7; p < 0.05), and
                         hydroquinone (FC = 2.8; p < 0.01) (Figures S4 and S5).
                               The hierarchical clustering heat map (Figures 3a and S6) shows the distribution of the
                         metabolites that are statistically different between low- (green) and high-grade (yellow)
                         dysplastic polyps. The partial least square discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) reported in
                         Figure 3b shows the presence of a metabolic signature associated with low- (green) or
                         high-grade (yellow) dysplastic polyps.

                         3.4. Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States
                         (PICRUSt) in Low-Grade vs. High-Grade
                              PICRUSt analysis was performed to predict the metabolic function of bacteria found
                         differently enriched in the low- or the high-grade group. PICRUSt analysis on MAM
                         identified 17 different pathways statistically enriched in low- or high-grade dysplastic
                         polyps (4 enriched in low-grade and 13 enriched in high-grade). We show these pathways
                         in Table 2. We consulted the MetaCyc website (https://metacyc.org/, accessed on 26
                         September 2022) to identify the products of each pathway which emerged from the PICRUSt
                         analysis. In particular, in Figure S7, we show the mixed acid fermentation pathway and
                         superpathway of the pyrimidine ribonucleosides salvage, which were enriched in the
                         high-grade group.

                         3.5. Integration of MAM and Polyp-Adherent Metabolome Data
                              In order to investigate which bacterial taxa and small molecules/metabolite classes
                         were mainly responsible for the overall associations with the histological grade of polyps,
                         the individual correlations between genus level, bacterial abundance profile, class level,
                         and individual metabolite level intensity profile were analyzed using the M2IA open-source
                         web server.
Cancers       15, 3065
        2023,2023,
   Cancers         15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                               11 of
                                                                                                                                       11 of 21
                                                                                                                                              22




                                     Figure
                                  Figure      3. (a)
                                          3. (a)     Hierarchical
                                                 Hierarchical     clustering
                                                               clustering    heat-map
                                                                           heat-map     showing
                                                                                      showing     different
                                                                                                different    metabolitedistributions
                                                                                                           metabolite     distributionsbetween
                                                                                                                                        between
                                     low- (green) and high-grade (yellow) dysplastic polyps. All the metabolites listed show a statisti-
                                  low- (green) and high-grade (yellow) dysplastic polyps. All the metabolites listed show a statistically
                                     cally significant difference between low and high-grade dysplasia groups (p < 0.05). Higher concen-
                                  significant difference between low and high-grade dysplasia groups (p < 0.05). Higher concentrations
                                     trations are reported in red, while low levels are in blue (auto-scaled data). (b) Partial least square
                                  arediscriminant
                                      reported in red,  while(PLS-DA)
                                                     analysis low levelsshowing
                                                                         are in blue (auto-scaled
                                                                                  different       data).distribution
                                                                                            metabolite   (b) Partial least square
                                                                                                                      between      discriminant
                                                                                                                                low- (green) and
                                  analysis  (PLS-DA)    showing   different
                                     high-grade (yellow) dysplastic polyps. metabolite  distribution  between   low-   (green)  and high-grade
                                  (yellow) dysplastic polyps.
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                                   12 of 21




                         Table 2. Pathways differently enriched in patients with low- (green) or high-grade (yellow) dysplastic
                         polyps, obtained by PICRUSt analysis. * Pathway described in article Discussion.

                                            Pathway                               Description                  p-Value
                          Superpathway of adenosylcobalamin salvage
                                     from cobinamide I                        Vitamin biosynthesis           8.54 × 10−3
                                    (COBALSYN-PWY)
                             Adenosylcobalamin biosynthesis from
                                                                              Vitamin biosynthesis               0.016
                            adenosylcobinamide-GDP I (PWY-5509)
                          Superpathway of adenosylcobalamin salvage
                                                                              Vitamin biosynthesis           2.78 × 10−3
                                from cobinamide II (PWY-6269)
                                Sucrose degradation IV (sucrose
                                                                           Carbohydrate degradation             0.035
                                  phosphorylase) (PWY-5384)
                                    Mixed acid fermentation
                                                                           Carbohydrate degradation          5.94 × 10−3
                                   (FERMENTATION-PWY) *
                                Superpathway of tetrahydrofolate
                                                                              Vitamin biosynthesis               0.036
                            biosynthesis and salvage (FOLSYN-PWY)
                                Superpathway of tetrahydrofolate
                                                                              Vitamin biosynthesis               0.034
                                    biosynthesis (PWY-6612)
                             Superpathway of thiamine diphosphate
                                                                              Vitamin biosynthesis               0.034
                                  biosynthesis II (PWY-6895)
                          Superpathway of purine nucleotides de novo
                                       biosynthesis II                       Nucleotides synthesis           6.73 × 10−3
                                 (DENOVOPURINE2-PWY)
                           Superpathway of guanosine nucleotides de
                                                                             Nucleotides synthesis              0.028
                               novo biosynthesis II (PWY-6125)
                          Superpathway of pyrimidine ribonucleosides
                                                                             Nucleotides synthesis           7.02 × 10−3
                                    salvage (PWY-7196) *
                           Superpathway of guanosine nucleotides de
                                                                             Nucleotides synthesis              0.036
                                novo biosynthesis I (PWY-7228)
                          Superpathway of purine nucleotides de novo
                                                                             Nucleotides synthesis              0.038
                                   biosynthesis I (PWY-841)
                          Superpathway of pyrimidine ribonucleotides
                                                                             Nucleotides synthesis              0.031
                               de novo biosynthesis (PWY0-162)
                           Incomplete reductive TCA cycle (P42-PWY)           Reductive TCA cycle               0.017
                                                                             Secondary metabolite
                                 PreQ0 biosynthesis (PWY-6703)                                                  0.049
                                                                                 biosynthesis
                           Pyrimidine deoxyribonucleotides de novo         Nucleoside and nucleotide
                                                                                                                0.019
                                  biosynthesis II (PWY-7187)                       synthesis


                              As shown in Figure 4, PLS-DA revealed the presence of specific microbiota and
                         metabolic signatures associated with low- (green) and high-grade dysplasia (yellow).
                              The correlations between modulated genera, significant metabolite classes, and their
                         relative individual metabolites (FC > 1.3 or <0.769, p < 0.05) were performed using 16S
                         sequencing and metabolomic data obtained from the analysis of low- and high-grade
                         polyps. Spearman’s rank correlations were calculated between the relative concentration
                         of metabolite classes and the abundance of bacterial taxonomic groups. More than two
                         hundred significant bacteria-metabolite class correlations were identified at the genus level.
                         Fifty-six of these were positive correlations, while 158 were negative correlations (Figure 5).
                         Aromatic compounds were negatively correlated with Pelomonas, Phascolarctobacterium, and
                         Bacteroides, to which B. fragilis belongs (Figure 5). Pelomonas and Phascolarctobacterium were
                         also negatively correlated with organonitrogen compounds.
Cancers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                      13 of 22
   Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                                                     13 of 21




                                      Figure
                                  Figure       4. PLS-DA.
                                           4. PLS-DA.      Specific
                                                       Specific MAM    and and
                                                                     MAM         mucosa-associated
                                                                            mucosa-associated           metabolite
                                                                                                   metabolite      signatures.
                                                                                                              signatures.      PLS-DA
                                                                                                                          PLS-DA         analysis
                                                                                                                                   analysis of
     Cancers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                         14 of 22
                                      of low-grade   (green)  and  high-grade  dysplasia    (yellow). The three-dimensional  score
                                  low-grade (green) and high-grade dysplasia (yellow). The three-dimensional score plot indicates  plot indicates
                                  the the  degree
                                      degree   of of  group
                                                  group       differences
                                                         differences  usingusing  the three
                                                                            the first  first three principal
                                                                                             principal       components.
                                                                                                       components.         Each
                                                                                                                     Each dot    dot a    sin- a
                                                                                                                                      indicates
                                                                                                                              indicates
                                  gle single
                                      sample. sample.

                                       The correlations between modulated genera, significant metabolite classes, and their
                                  relative individual metabolites (FC > 1.3 or <0.769, p < 0.05) were performed using 16S
                                  sequencing and metabolomic data obtained from the analysis of low- and high-grade
                                  polyps. Spearman’s rank correlations were calculated between the relative concentration
                                  of metabolite classes and the abundance of bacterial taxonomic groups. More than two
                                  hundred significant bacteria-metabolite class correlations were identified at the genus
                                  level. Fifty-six of these were positive correlations, while 158 were negative correlations
                                  (Figure 5). Aromatic compounds were negatively correlated with Pelomonas, Phascolarcto-
                                  bacterium, and Bacteroides, to which B. fragilis belongs (Figure 5). Pelomonas and Phascolarc-
                                  tobacterium were also negatively correlated with organonitrogen compounds.




                                      Figure 5. Correlation heat map between MAM genus and mucosa-associated metabolite class. The
                                      red color indicates a positive correlation, while the blue color indicates a negative correlation. The
                                      darker5.color
                                      Figure         indicates
                                                Correlation heathemapmost  highly
                                                                       between     correlated
                                                                                 MAM            variables.
                                                                                        genus and           The asterisks
                                                                                                    mucosa-associated       indicate
                                                                                                                       metabolite     the The
                                                                                                                                   class.  correlation
                                      red color indicates
                                      coefficient p-value:a *p
                                                            positive correlation,
                                                               < 0.05 and   ** p <while
                                                                                   0.01. the blue color indicates a negative correlation. The
                                      darker color indicates the most highly correlated variables. The asterisks indicate the correlation
                                      coefficient p-value: * p < 0.05 and ** p < 0.01.

                                      4. Discussion
                                           In this study, we have analyzed 78 colon polyp patients with the aim of correlating the
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                         14 of 21




                         4. Discussion
                               In this study, we have analyzed 78 colon polyp patients with the aim of correlating the
                         composition of their gut microbiota and associated metabolome with tumor development.
                         To this end, we devised a novel sampling strategy that enables the collection of mucosa-
                         associated microbiota and metabolome without jeopardizing tumor integrity. By integrating
                         these data, we identified bacteria and metabolites involved in colorectal cancer in a tumor-
                         stage-specific manner.
                               It is well known that the intestinal microbiota may compromise the mucosal barrier,
                         cross the epithelium, and interact with immune cells, causing local inflammation, cancer
                         induction and progression [2]. Thus, colon cancer microbiota has been generally character-
                         ized by using samples collected during surgery to look for bacteria that infiltrate the tumor
                         and shape its microenvironment. We reasoned that this approach would identify mostly
                         passenger bacteria, including not only bacteria with a role in cancer progression, but also
                         those that simply thrive in the cancer microenvironment. Because we wanted instead to
                         identify driver bacteria, we decided to focus on colon adenomas, i.e., benign tumors that
                         have just began the adenoma–carcinoma sequence. Since adenomas are usually excised
                         at colonoscopy to undergo the necessary histological analyses and diagnostic procedures,
                         we devised a strategy that preserved tumor integrity. Our aim was, thus, to investigate
                         whether the surface of intestinal adenomas hosts bacteria that influence cell transformation,
                         given that the bacterial species and metabolites in contact with enterocytes may play an
                         important role in colon carcinogenesis [42,43]. A drawback of this approach is that we
                         cannot compare our samples with healthy neighboring mucosa, since the healthy mucosa
                         is not removed during colonoscopy and therefore is not available for the collection of
                         microbiota and metabolites by brushing.
                               By comparing the composition of MAM with that of LAM—the former obtained from
                         swabs brushed against the polyp surface, while the latter isolated from fecal samples—we
                         show that the α-diversity indexes (i.e., observed, Shannon, and Simpson) of LAM are
                         significantly higher than those of MAM (Figure 1a–c), and that LAM displays tighter
                         clustering compared to MAM (Figure 1d), in good agreement with previous studies on
                         biopsies from healthy individuals [22,24,44,45].
                               Despite having higher diversity levels, LAM appears to be more homogeneous than
                         MAM, as shown in Figure 1d (p < 0.001). Indeed, LAM displays enrichment of the phyla
                         Firmicutes (Bacillota), Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidota), and Verrucomicrobia, while MAM
                         mainly consists of Proteobacteria (Pseudomonadota) and Actinobacteria (Actinomycetota)
                         (Figure S1). Overall, we found 49 genera that were increased in LAM or MAM samples
                         (q < 0.05) (Table S4), consistent with our data at the phylum level. Our findings are also in
                         good agreement with a study by Tang and colleagues [45] showing that, among individuals
                         without gastrointestinal symptoms undergoing routine screening colonoscopies, the phyla
                         Firmicutes (Bacillota) and Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidota) were enriched in LAM, whereas
                         Proteobacteria (Pseudomonadota) were more abundant in biopsy samples. Moreover,
                         analyzing healthy subjects, Ringel and colleagues found that LAM was enriched with
                         Firmicutes (Bacillota)—in agreement with our results and those of Eckburg et al. [23]—and
                         Actinobacteria (Actinomycetota) and less populated by Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidota) and
                         Proteobacteria (Pseudomonadota)—consistent with our results—compared to MAM [22].
                         In agreement with our data, the mucosal samples analyzed by Sun and colleagues showed
                         an enrichment of Propionibacterium (phylum Actinobacteria) and Escherichia (phylum Pro-
                         teobacteria) compared to stool samples [24]. The discrepancy in abundance of some phyla
                         between these literature data and our results can be explained by the fact that our analyses
                         were performed on patients with low- or high-grade dysplastic colorectal polyps, whereas
                         the published data were on healthy subjects. Moreover, differences in experimental proce-
                         dures such as sampling and extraction protocols, or data analysis could have influenced the
                         results [24,45]. It is also possible that our swab-brushing procedure may lead to discrepancy
                         in MAM composition detection compared to the commonly used biopsies.
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                              15 of 21




                               We have then characterized the composition of MAM and associated metabolome
                         in colon polyp patients stratified according to their tumor histology (high- vs. low-grade
                         dysplasia). We show that MAM from the low-grade dysplasia group has a larger number of
                         Pelomonas and Phascolarctobacterium than that of patients with high-grade dysplastic polyps
                         (Figure 2a). Interestingly, Pelomonas is associated with the onset of multifocal atrophic gas-
                         tritis and intestinal metaplasia, well established premalignant gastro-intestinal lesions [46],
                         and is enriched in LAM of CRC patients receiving chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy
                         treatment [47], while Phascolarctobacterium is enriched in stool samples of patients with
                         CRC compared to healthy subjects [48]. Overall, our results show that Pelomonas and
                         Phascolarctobacterium are more abundant in low-grade vs. high-grade dysplasia, which
                         supports the hypothesis that these microorganisms may function as driver bacteria during
                         CRC pathogenesis; however, functional experiments are needed to support this possibility.
                               At the species level, we detected enrichment of Bacteroides fragilis and Bacteroides spp.
                         on the surface of low-grade polyps compared to high-grade adenomas (Figure 2b). Thus,
                         it is tempting to speculate that these species may play a role in CRC tumor initiation.
                         Intriguingly, enterotoxigenic B. fragilis is a well-known driver of CRC [3] due to its onco-
                         genic properties. Among the species found enriched in the low-grade dysplasia group,
                         we also found unclassified Erysipelotrichaceae incertae sedis, a species that belongs to the
                         Erysipelotrichaceae family. Interestingly, the levels of intestinal Erysipelotrichaceae are reduced
                         in the LAM of patients with advanced colon adenomas compared to healthy subjects [49],
                         and increased in hyperplastic polyps compared to adenocarcinomas [47]. Lastly, bacteria
                         belonging to this family play an important role in inflammation [50] and are associated
                         with increased levels of inflammatory markers involved in tumor growth, invasion, and
                         metastasis [51]. The lack of Fusobacteria enrichment in our samples can be explained by the
                         fact that Fusobacterium spp. colonize more advanced CRC tissues [52].
                               With regard to the metabolome, we succeeded in identifying 41 metabolites differen-
                         tially associated with low- and high-grade dysplasia groups, with 29 of them previously
                         found enriched in LAM of CRC patients compared to healthy subjects [48,53–58]. These
                         findings confirm and extend our previous work on tumor-associated metabolites isolated
                         from 20 patients [31]. More specifically, we found erythronic acid (FC = 0.7) (Figure S4)
                         enriched in low- compared to high-grade dysplastic polyps, a metabolite produced by
                         bacteria from the Actinobacteria (Actinomycetota) and Proteobacteria (Pseudomonadota)
                         phyla [56]. Fittingly, we found enrichment of the aforementioned genus Pelomonas, which
                         belongs to Proteobacteria (Pseudomonadota), in low-grade dysplastic polyps.
                               In contrast, microbiota analyses of high-grade dysplastic adenomas showed an enrich-
                         ment of the genus Anaerococcus (Figure 2b), that was found significantly enriched in CRC
                         tissues and is considered a potential passenger genus [4]. Further functional studies are
                         needed to evaluate the role of Anaerococcus in cancer progression.
                               As expected, our results indicate a gradual replacement of the potential driver bacteria
                         by the potential passenger bacteria in high-grade adenomas. These microorganisms are
                         opportunistic pathogens—possibly involved in CRC progression—taking advantage of the
                         changes occurring in the TME to colonize it even further. In fact, we did not identify any
                         enrichment of potential passenger genera or species in low-grade dysplastic samples. In
                         this regard, a limitation of the present work is that we cannot classify bacteria as driver or
                         passenger based on our results, but rather must rely on previously suggested classifications,
                         which, however, are often based on disease–bacteria correlations and not on functional
                         experiments at a mechanistic level.
                               Upon analysis of the polyp-associated metabolome, we found L-serine (FC = 2.8)
                         and threonine (FC = 8.2) enriched in high- vs. low-grade dysplastic polyps (Figure S4).
                         Interestingly, Garza et al. have recently published a computational model explaining
                         the association between passenger bacteria and CRC metabolites, such as L-serine and
                         threonine [17]. These authors suggest that changes in metabolite composition may allow
                         opportunistic passenger bacteria to colonize tumor sites [17]. Moreover, a more recent
                         study has shown that L-serine is required for CRC cell proliferation, and that dysregu-
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                            16 of 21




                         lation of serine metabolism is closely related to the occurrence and development of this
                         tumor [59]. Two other metabolites found enriched in the high-grade dysplasia group were
                         lactic acid (FC = 1.9) and butyric acid (FC = 3.7) (Figure S4), which may both derive from
                         the aerobic glycolysis occurring in CRC cells and/or the metabolism of gut bacteria. In fact,
                         cancer cells are able to perform aerobic glycolysis even under oxygen availability, thereby
                         producing lactate from pyruvate [60,61], a phenomenon known as the Warburg effect [62].
                         Due to this metabolic switch to aerobic glycolysis, cancer cells are unable to efficiently
                         metabolize butyrate, the primary energy source of normal colonocytes. On the other hand,
                         as aforementioned, our samples from the high-grade dysplasia group displayed increased
                         levels of Anaerococcus spp. (Figure 2b), which belongs to the phylum Firmicutes (Bacillota)
                         known to be a major source of butyric acid and lactic acid [63].
                               PICRUSt analysis on MAM identified four pathways statistically enriched in low-
                         grade and 13 in high-grade dysplasia groups. Interestingly, the high-grade group showed
                         an enrichment of the mixed acid fermentation pathway and superpathway of pyrimi-
                         dine ribonucleosides salvage. The first one leads to the production of lactic acid, while
                         the second one of uracil, both metabolites enriched in high-grade dysplastic polyps
                         (Figures S4 and S7). It is worth noting that the PICRUSt analysis provides only a pre-
                         diction of the functions of the bacterial community.
                               The integration of bacterial genera and metabolite class data, crucial to understanding
                         the relationship between bacterial genera and metabolite classes [64], shows that the two
                         genera, Pelomonas and Phascolarctobacterium, enriched in the low-grade dysplasia group, are
                         negatively correlated with organonitrogen compounds (Figure 5). Interestingly, betaine,
                         carnitine, and choline, whose high levels in the plasma of human subjects have been
                         shown to reduce CRC risk [65], are organonitrogen compounds. In particular, they all
                         are trimethylamine (TMA) precursors that can be metabolized to trimethylamine-N-oxide
                         (TMAO) by Phascolarctobacterium [66]. TMAO is known to promote CRC progression not
                         only through N-Nitroso compounds formation [67], which leads to DNA damage, but
                         also via the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [68]. Thus, it is possible that an
                         increase in Pelomonas and Phascolarctobacterium, as demonstrated by the present study, may
                         ultimately lead to the downregulation of betaine, carnitine, and choline as the latter may be
                         used by the bacteria to produce TMA and consequently, TMAO. Unfortunately, the method
                         used for the analysis of mucosal-adherent metabolome is not suitable for the quantification
                         of TMAO, so further analyses are needed to confirm this hypothesis.
                               Lastly, the genera, Pelomonas, Phascolarctobacterium, and Bacteroides, the latter of which
                         comprises the species B. fragilis, (Figure 5), showed a negative correlation with benzene and
                         benzene derivatives, which include benzoic acid and its substituted derivatives endowed
                         with HDAC inhibitory activity [69]. Thus, it is conceivable that the decrease in benzene
                         and derivatives may be involved in CRC development.

                         5. Conclusions
                              In conclusion, our findings (summarized in Figure 6), based on a novel sampling
                         strategy, support the hypothesis of a direct and indirect involvement of the gut microbiota
                         and their metabolites in CRC initiation and early progression, since we found different
                         signatures in low-grade dysplastic polyps compared with high-grade ones, which represent
                         more advanced stages of the adenoma–carcinoma sequence. Our results also stress the
                         importance of analyzing tumor-associated microbiota and metabolome to identify key
                         carcinogenic pathogens, whereas luminal-derived data, although still essential as clinical
                         markers, only seem to recapitulate the general gut environment.
                          and their metabolites in CRC initiation and early progression, since we found different
                          signatures in low-grade dysplastic polyps compared with high-grade ones, which repre-
                          sent more advanced stages of the adenoma–carcinoma sequence. Our results also stress
                          the importance of analyzing tumor-associated microbiota and metabolome to identify key
                          carcinogenic pathogens, whereas luminal-derived data, although still essential as clinical
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                        17 of 21
                          markers, only seem to recapitulate the general gut environment.




                         Figure 6. Diagram showing the key findings of this article about MAM and mucosa-associated
                          Figure 6. Diagram
                         metabolome          showing
                                     of patients       the key
                                                 with high-     findings ofdysplastic
                                                            or low-grade    this article about MAM and mucosa-associated
                                                                                      polyps.
                          metabolome of patients with high- or low-grade dysplastic polyps.

                         Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
                         //www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/cancers15123065/s1, Table S1: Previous gastrointestinal condi-
                         tions reported by the analyzed patients with low- (green) or high-grade (yellow) dysplastic polyps;
                         Table S2: comparison of nutrient intake between patients with low- and high-grade dysplastic
                         polyps; Table S3: metabolomics data; Table S4: Genera that distinguish MAM and LAM. Nega-
                         tive LDA score: enrichment in MAM. Positive LDA score: enrichment in LAM. Only statistically
                         significant genera were included in the table (p-value and FDR < 0.05). The updated names cov-
                         ered by the International Code of Nomenclature for Prokaryotes are indicated in parentheses ([70]);
                         Figure S1: pie chart and linear discriminant analysis effect size (LDA-LEfSe) of the comparison
                         between MAM and LAM; Table S4: genera that distinguish MAM and LAM; Figure S2: phylogenetic
                         heat tree showing differences in the relative abundance of MAM taxa between high-grade dysplastic
                         (yellow) vs. low-grade dysplastic polyps (green); Figure S3: linear discriminant analysis effect size
                         (LDA-LEfSe) showing (a) bacterial genera and (b) bacterial species enriched in LAM high- (yellow;
                         LDS score > 2) vs. low-grade dysplastic adenomas (green; LDA score < −2); Figure S4: box plots
                         of the most significant molecules discriminating low- (green) from high-grade (yellow) dysplastic
                         adenomatous polyps; Figure S5: volcano plot of quantified metabolites; Figure S6: alternative rep-
                         resentation of the hierarchical clustering heat-map reported in Figure 3a. Here, the patients with
                         low-grade dysplastic polyps (green) are grouped on the right, while the patients with high-grade
                         dysplastic polyps (yellow) are grouped on the left; Figure S7: products of mixed acid fermentation
                         pathway (a) and superpathway of pyrimidine ribonucleosides salvage (b).
                         Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.G.C., M.L.V., A.A. and I.D.; formal analysis, M.G.C.,
                         M.L.V., E.R., B.A., E.B. (Elisa Bona), E.P., D.F. and M.M. (Marcello Manfredi); investigation,
                         M.G.C., M.L.V., M.S., E.B. (Elettra Barberis), E.A., M.M. (Marta Mellai), S.B., G.B. and
                         M.M. (Marcello Manfredi); resources, S.J., P.O. and R.B.; writing—original draft preparation, M.G.C.,
                         M.L.V., M.M. (Marcello Manfredi), A.A. and I.D.; writing—review and editing, M.S., S.J., E.B. (Elettra
                         Barberis), E.A., M.M. (Marta Mellai), S.B., G.B., P.O., R.B., E.R., B.A., E.B. (Elisa Bona), E.P. and D.F.;
                         visualization, M.G.C., M.L.V., E.B. (Elettra Barberis), E.A., M.M. (Marcello Manfredi) and A.A.; supervi-
                         sion, A.A. and I.D.; project administration, A.A. and I.D.; funding acquisition, M.M. (Marcello Manfredi)
                         and I.D. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                                              18 of 21




                                   Funding: The research leading to these results has received funding from AIRC under IG
                                   2021-ID. 25886 project–P.I. Irma Dianzani, and from the Italian Ministry of Education, University and
                                   Research (MIUR) program “Departments of Excellence 2018–2022”, FOHN Project–Department of
                                   Health Sciences, and AGING Project–Department of Translational Medicine, Università del Piemonte
                                   Orientale.
                                   Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
                                   of Helsinki and approved by the Ethics Committee of Maggiore della Carità Hospital (Novara, Italy.
                                   Study No. CE 78/19; 7 June 2019).
                                   Informed Consent Statement: Written informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in
                                   the study.
                                  Data Availability Statement: The dataset comprising raw 16S rRNA sequences generated during the
                                  current study was deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database.
                                  BioProject MIMEC Project_Swab PRJNA783496 (https://submit.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/subs/sra/SUB1
                                  0703567/overview, accessed on 17 December 2021) and MIMEC Project_Fecal PRJNA783535 (https:
                                  //submit.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/subs/sra/SUB10721767/overview, accessed on 17 December 2021).
                                   Acknowledgments: We sincerely thank Santina Castriciano (the Scientific Affairs Director of COPAN
                                   Italia SpA) for providing eNAT™ samples to collect mucosal-adherent microbiota. We would like to
                                   thank Marcello Arsura (Abeschool) for reviewing the English language.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Sung, H.; Ferlay, J.; Siegel, R.L.; Laversanne, M.; Soerjomataram, I.; Jemal, A.; Bray, F. Global Cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN
      Estimates of Incidence and Mortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2021, 71, 209–249. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
2.    Song, M.; Chan, A.T.; Sun, J. Influence of the Gut Microbiome, Diet, and Environment on Risk of Colorectal Cancer. Gastroenterology
      2020, 158, 322–340. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.    Tjalsma, H.; Boleij, A.; Marchesi, J.R.; Dutilh, B.E. A Bacterial Driver-Passenger Model for Colorectal Cancer: Beyond the Usual
      Suspects. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2012, 10, 575–582. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.    Wang, Y.; Zhang, C.; Hou, S.; Wu, X.; Liu, J.; Wan, X. Analyses of Potential Driver and Passenger Bacteria in Human Colorectal
      Cancer. Cancer Manag. Res. 2020, 12, 11553–11561. [CrossRef]
5.    Mori, G.; Pasca, M.R. Gut Microbial Signatures in Sporadic and Hereditary Colorectal Cancer. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 1312.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Kosumi, K.; Mima, K.; Baba, H.; Ogino, S. Dysbiosis of the Gut Microbiota and Colorectal Cancer: The Key Target of Molecular
      Pathological Epidemiology. J. Lab. Precis. Med. 2018, 3, 76. [CrossRef]
7.    Kostic, A.D.; Chun, E.; Robertson, L.; Glickman, J.N.; Gallini, C.A.; Michaud, M.; Clancy, T.E.; Chung, D.C.; Lochhead, P.; Hold,
      G.L.; et al. Fusobacterium Nucleatum Potentiates Intestinal Tumorigenesis and Modulates the Tumor-Immune Microenvironment.
      Cell Host Microbe 2013, 14, 207–215. [CrossRef]
8.    Wu, S.; Powell, J.; Mathioudakis, N.; Kane, S.; Fernandez, E.; Sears, C.L. Bacteroides Fragilis Enterotoxin Induces Intestinal
      Epithelial Cell Secretion of Interleukin-8 through Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases and a Tyrosine Kinase-Regulated Nuclear
      Factor-KappaB Pathway. Infect. Immun. 2004, 72, 5832–5839. [CrossRef]
9.    Chung, L.; Thiele Orberg, E.; Geis, A.L.; Chan, J.L.; Fu, K.; DeStefano Shields, C.E.; Dejea, C.M.; Fathi, P.; Chen, J.; Finard, B.B.;
      et al. Bacteroides Fragilis Toxin Coordinates a Pro-Carcinogenic Inflammatory Cascade via Targeting of Colonic Epithelial Cells.
      Cell Host Microbe 2018, 23, 203–214.e5. [CrossRef]
10.   Nougayrède, J.-P.; Homburg, S.; Taieb, F.; Boury, M.; Brzuszkiewicz, E.; Gottschalk, G.; Buchrieser, C.; Hacker, J.; Dobrindt, U.;
      Oswald, E. Escherichia Coli Induces DNA Double-Strand Breaks in Eukaryotic Cells. Science 2006, 313, 848–851. [CrossRef]
11.   Avril, M.; DePaolo, R.W. “Driver-Passenger” Bacteria and Their Metabolites in the Pathogenesis of Colorectal Cancer. Gut Microbes
      2021, 13, 1941710. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Louis, P.; Hold, G.L.; Flint, H.J. The Gut Microbiota, Bacterial Metabolites and Colorectal Cancer. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2014, 12,
      661–672. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   Hassan, C.; Gimeno-García, A.; Kalager, M.; Spada, C.; Zullo, A.; Costamagna, G.; Senore, C.; Rex, D.K.; Quintero, E. Systematic
      Review with Meta-Analysis: The Incidence of Advanced Neoplasia after Polypectomy in Patients with and without Low-Risk
      Adenomas. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2014, 39, 905–912. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Peng, Y.; Nie, Y.; Yu, J.; Wong, C.C. Microbial Metabolites in Colorectal Cancer: Basic and Clinical Implications. Metabolites 2021,
      11, 159. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                                                 19 of 21




15.   Cao, H.; Luo, S.; Xu, M.; Zhang, Y.; Song, S.; Wang, S.; Kong, X.; He, N.; Cao, X.; Yan, F.; et al. The Secondary Bile Acid,
      Deoxycholate Accelerates Intestinal Adenoma-Adenocarcinoma Sequence in ApcMin/+ Mice through Enhancing Wnt Signaling.
      Fam. Cancer 2014, 13, 563–571. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.   Payne, C.M.; Weber, C.; Crowley-Skillicorn, C.; Dvorak, K.; Bernstein, H.; Bernstein, C.; Holubec, H.; Dvorakova, B.; Garewal,
      H. Deoxycholate Induces Mitochondrial Oxidative Stress and Activates NF-KappaB through Multiple Mechanisms in HCT-116
      Colon Epithelial Cells. Carcinogenesis 2007, 28, 215–222. [CrossRef]
17.   Garza, D.R.; Taddese, R.; Wirbel, J.; Zeller, G.; Boleij, A.; Huynen, M.A.; Dutilh, B.E. Metabolic Models Predict Bacterial Passengers
      in Colorectal Cancer. Cancer Metab. 2020, 8, 3. [CrossRef]
18.   Yachida, S.; Mizutani, S.; Shiroma, H.; Shiba, S.; Nakajima, T.; Sakamoto, T.; Watanabe, H.; Masuda, K.; Nishimoto, Y.; Kubo, M.;
      et al. Metagenomic and Metabolomic Analyses Reveal Distinct Stage-Specific Phenotypes of the Gut Microbiota in Colorectal
      Cancer. Nat. Med. 2019, 25, 968–976. [CrossRef]
19.   Bisht, V.; Nash, K.; Xu, Y.; Agarwal, P.; Bosch, S.; Gkoutos, G.V.; Acharjee, A. Integration of the Microbiome, Metabolome and
      Transcriptomics Data Identified Novel Metabolic Pathway Regulation in Colorectal Cancer. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 5763.
      [CrossRef]
20.   Chen, F.; Dai, X.; Zhou, C.-C.; Li, K.-X.; Zhang, Y.-J.; Lou, X.-Y.; Zhu, Y.-M.; Sun, Y.-L.; Peng, B.-X.; Cui, W. Integrated Analysis of
      the Faecal Metagenome and Serum Metabolome Reveals the Role of Gut Microbiome-Associated Metabolites in the Detection of
      Colorectal Cancer and Adenoma. Gut 2022, 71, 1315–1325. [CrossRef]
21.   Sun, J.; Kato, I. Gut Microbiota, Inflammation and Colorectal Cancer. Genes. Dis. 2016, 3, 130–143. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.   Ringel, Y.; Maharshak, N.; Ringel-Kulka, T.; Wolber, E.A.; Sartor, R.B.; Carroll, I.M. High Throughput Sequencing Reveals Distinct
      Microbial Populations within the Mucosal and Luminal Niches in Healthy Individuals. Gut Microbes 2015, 6, 173–181. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
23.   Eckburg, P.B.; Bik, E.M.; Bernstein, C.N.; Purdom, E.; Dethlefsen, L.; Sargent, M.; Gill, S.R.; Nelson, K.E.; Relman, D.A. Diversity
      of the Human Intestinal Microbial Flora. Science 2005, 308, 1635–1638. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Sun, S.; Zhu, X.; Huang, X.; Murff, H.J.; Ness, R.M.; Seidner, D.L.; Sorgen, A.A.; Blakley, I.C.; Yu, C.; Dai, Q.; et al. On the
      Robustness of Inference of Association with the Gut Microbiota in Stool, Rectal Swab and Mucosal Tissue Samples. Sci. Rep. 2021,
      11, 14828. [CrossRef]
25.   Avelar-Barragan, J.; DeDecker, L.; Lu, Z.N.; Coppedge, B.; Karnes, W.E.; Whiteson, K.L. Distinct Colon Mucosa Microbiomes
      Associated with Tubular Adenomas and Serrated Polyps. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes 2022, 8, 69. [CrossRef]
26.   O’Brien, C.L.; Allison, G.E.; Grimpen, F.; Pavli, P. Impact of Colonoscopy Bowel Preparation on Intestinal Microbiota. PLoS ONE
      2013, 8, e62815. [CrossRef]
27.   Nagata, N.; Tohya, M.; Fukuda, S.; Suda, W.; Nishijima, S.; Takeuchi, F.; Ohsugi, M.; Tsujimoto, T.; Nakamura, T.; Shimomura, A.;
      et al. Effects of Bowel Preparation on the Human Gut Microbiome and Metabolome. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 4042. [CrossRef]
28.   Riboli, E.; Hunt, K.J.; Slimani, N.; Ferrari, P.; Norat, T.; Fahey, M.; Charrondière, U.R.; Hémon, B.; Casagrande, C.; Vignat, J.; et al.
      European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC): Study Populations and Data Collection. Public Health Nutr.
      2002, 5, 1113–1124. [CrossRef]
29.   Douglas, G.M.; Maffei, V.J.; Zaneveld, J.R.; Yurgel, S.N.; Brown, J.R.; Taylor, C.M.; Huttenhower, C.; Langille, M.G.I. PICRUSt2 for
      Prediction of Metagenome Functions. Nat. Biotechnol. 2020, 38, 685–688. [CrossRef]
30.   Parks, D.H.; Tyson, G.W.; Hugenholtz, P.; Beiko, R.G. STAMP: Statistical Analysis of Taxonomic and Functional Profiles.
      Bioinformatics 2014, 30, 3123–3124. [CrossRef]
31.   Barberis, E.; Joseph, S.; Amede, E.; Clavenna, M.G.; La Vecchia, M.; Sculco, M.; Aspesi, A.; Occhipinti, P.; Robotti, E.; Boldorini, R.;
      et al. A New Method for Investigating Microbiota-Produced Small Molecules in Adenomatous Polyps. Anal. Chim. Acta 2021,
      1179, 338841. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.   Ewing, B.; Hillier, L.; Wendl, M.C.; Green, P. Base-Calling of Automated Sequencer Traces Using Phred. I. Accuracy Assessment.
      Genome Res. 1998, 8, 175–185. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.   Cole, J.R.; Wang, Q.; Fish, J.A.; Chai, B.; McGarrell, D.M.; Sun, Y.; Brown, C.T.; Porras-Alfaro, A.; Kuske, C.R.; Tiedje, J.M.
      Ribosomal Database Project: Data and Tools for High Throughput RRNA Analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014, 42, D633–D642.
      [CrossRef]
34.   Bona, E.; Massa, N.; Toumatia, O.; Novello, G.; Cesaro, P.; Todeschini, V.; Boatti, L.; Mignone, F.; Titouah, H.; Zitouni, A.; et al.
      Climatic Zone and Soil Properties Determine the Biodiversity of the Soil Bacterial Communities Associated to Native Plants from
      Desert Areas of North-Central Algeria. Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.   Torre, E.; Sola, D.; Caramaschi, A.; Mignone, F.; Bona, E.; Fallarini, S. A Pilot Study on Clinical Scores, Immune Cell Modulation,
      and Microbiota Composition in Allergic Patients with Rhinitis and Asthma Treated with a Probiotic Preparation. Int. Arch. Allergy
      Immunol. 2022, 183, 186–200. [CrossRef]
36.   Dhariwal, A.; Chong, J.; Habib, S.; King, I.L.; Agellon, L.B.; Xia, J. MicrobiomeAnalyst: A Web-Based Tool for Comprehensive
      Statistical, Visual and Meta-Analysis of Microbiome Data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017, 45, W180–W188. [CrossRef]
37.   Foster, Z.S.L.; Sharpton, T.J.; Grünwald, N.J. Metacoder: An R Package for Visualization and Manipulation of Community
      Taxonomic Diversity Data. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2017, 13, e1005404. [CrossRef]
38.   McMurdie, P.J.; Holmes, S. Phyloseq: An R Package for Reproducible Interactive Analysis and Graphics of Microbiome Census
      Data. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e61217. [CrossRef]
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                                                 20 of 21




39.   Agus, A.; Clément, K.; Sokol, H. Gut Microbiota-Derived Metabolites as Central Regulators in Metabolic Disorders. Gut 2021, 70,
      1174–1182. [CrossRef]
40.   Lamichhane, S.; Sen, P.; Dickens, A.M.; Orešič, M.; Bertram, H.C. Gut Metabolome Meets Microbiome: A Methodological
      Perspective to Understand the Relationship between Host and Microbe. Methods 2018, 149, 3–12. [CrossRef]
41.   Yuan, C.; Graham, M.; Staley, C.; Subramanian, S. Mucosal Microbiota and Metabolome along the Intestinal Tract Reveal a
      Location-Specific Relationship. mSystems 2020, 5, e00055-20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.   Gao, R.; Kong, C.; Huang, L.; Li, H.; Qu, X.; Liu, Z.; Lan, P.; Wang, J.; Qin, H. Mucosa-Associated Microbiota Signature in
      Colorectal Cancer. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 2017, 36, 2073–2083. [CrossRef]
43.   Wang, Q.; Ye, J.; Fang, D.; Lv, L.; Wu, W.; Shi, D.; Li, Y.; Yang, L.; Bian, X.; Wu, J.; et al. Multi-Omic Profiling Reveals Associations
      between the Gut Mucosal Microbiome, the Metabolome, and Host DNA Methylation Associated Gene Expression in Patients
      with Colorectal Cancer. BMC Microbiol. 2020, 20, 83. [CrossRef]
44.   Donaldson, G.P.; Lee, S.M.; Mazmanian, S.K. Gut Biogeography of the Bacterial Microbiota. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2016, 14, 20–32.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.   Tang, M.S.; Poles, J.; Leung, J.M.; Wolff, M.J.; Davenport, M.; Lee, S.C.; Lim, Y.A.; Chua, K.H.; Loke, P.; Cho, I. Inferred
      Metagenomic Comparison of Mucosal and Fecal Microbiota from Individuals Undergoing Routine Screening Colonoscopy
      Reveals Similar Differences Observed during Active Inflammation. Gut Microbes 2015, 6, 48–56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.   Yang, I.; Woltemate, S.; Piazuelo, M.B.; Bravo, L.E.; Yepez, M.C.; Romero-Gallo, J.; Delgado, A.G.; Wilson, K.T.; Peek, R.M.; Correa,
      P.; et al. Different Gastric Microbiota Compositions in Two Human Populations with High and Low Gastric Cancer Risk in
      Colombia. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 18594. [CrossRef]
47.   Mori, G.; Rampelli, S.; Orena, B.S.; Rengucci, C.; De Maio, G.; Barbieri, G.; Passardi, A.; Casadei Gardini, A.; Frassineti, G.L.;
      Gaiarsa, S.; et al. Shifts of Faecal Microbiota During Sporadic Colorectal Carcinogenesis. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 10329. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
48.   Weir, T.L.; Manter, D.K.; Sheflin, A.M.; Barnett, B.A.; Heuberger, A.L.; Ryan, E.P. Stool Microbiome and Metabolome Differences
      between Colorectal Cancer Patients and Healthy Adults. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e70803. [CrossRef]
49.   Zagato, E.; Pozzi, C.; Bertocchi, A.; Schioppa, T.; Saccheri, F.; Guglietta, S.; Fosso, B.; Melocchi, L.; Nizzoli, G.; Troisi, J.; et al.
      Endogenous Murine Microbiota Member Faecalibaculum Rodentium and Its Human Homologue Protect from Intestinal Tumour
      Growth. Nat. Microbiol. 2020, 5, 511–524. [CrossRef]
50.   Clos-Garcia, M.; Garcia, K.; Alonso, C.; Iruarrizaga-Lejarreta, M.; D’Amato, M.; Crespo, A.; Iglesias, A.; Cubiella, J.; Bujanda, L.;
      Falcón-Pérez, J.M. Integrative Analysis of Fecal Metagenomics and Metabolomics in Colorectal Cancer. Cancers 2020, 12, 1142.
      [CrossRef]
51.   Dinh, D.M.; Volpe, G.E.; Duffalo, C.; Bhalchandra, S.; Tai, A.K.; Kane, A.V.; Wanke, C.A.; Ward, H.D. Intestinal Microbiota,
      Microbial Translocation, and Systemic Inflammation in Chronic HIV Infection. J. Infect. Dis. 2015, 211, 19–27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.   Flanagan, L.; Schmid, J.; Ebert, M.; Soucek, P.; Kunicka, T.; Liska, V.; Bruha, J.; Neary, P.; Dezeeuw, N.; Tommasino, M.; et al.
      Fusobacterium Nucleatum Associates with Stages of Colorectal Neoplasia Development, Colorectal Cancer and Disease Outcome.
      Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 2014, 33, 1381–1390. [CrossRef]
53.   Cheng, Y.; Xie, G.; Chen, T.; Qiu, Y.; Zou, X.; Zheng, M.; Tan, B.; Feng, B.; Dong, T.; He, P.; et al. Distinct Urinary Metabolic Profile
      of Human Colorectal Cancer. J. Proteome Res. 2012, 11, 1354–1363. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.   Ni, Y.; Xie, G.; Jia, W. Metabonomics of Human Colorectal Cancer: New Approaches for Early Diagnosis and Biomarker Discovery.
      J. Proteome Res. 2014, 13, 3857–3870. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.   Brown, D.G.; Rao, S.; Weir, T.L.; O’Malia, J.; Bazan, M.; Brown, R.J.; Ryan, E.P. Metabolomics and Metabolic Pathway Networks
      from Human Colorectal Cancers, Adjacent Mucosa, and Stool. Cancer Metab. 2016, 4, 11. [CrossRef]
56.   Sinha, R.; Ahn, J.; Sampson, J.N.; Shi, J.; Yu, G.; Xiong, X.; Hayes, R.B.; Goedert, J.J. Fecal Microbiota, Fecal Metabolome, and
      Colorectal Cancer Interrelations. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0152126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.   Goedert, J.J.; Sampson, J.N.; Moore, S.C.; Xiao, Q.; Xiong, X.; Hayes, R.B.; Ahn, J.; Shi, J.; Sinha, R. Fecal Metabolomics: Assay
      Performance and Association with Colorectal Cancer. Carcinogenesis 2014, 35, 2089–2096. [CrossRef]
58.   Wang, X.; Wang, J.; Rao, B.; Deng, L. Gut Flora Profiling and Fecal Metabolite Composition of Colorectal Cancer Patients and
      Healthy Individuals. Exp. Ther. Med. 2022, 23, 250. [CrossRef]
59.   Zhao, X.; Fu, J.; Hu, B.; Chen, L.; Wang, J.; Fang, J.; Ge, C.; Lin, H.; Pan, K.; Fu, L.; et al. Serine Metabolism Regulates YAP Activity
      Through USP7 in Colon Cancer. Front. Cell. Dev. Biol. 2021, 9, 639111. [CrossRef]
60.   Qian, J.; Gong, Z.-C.; Zhang, Y.-N.; Wu, H.-H.; Zhao, J.; Wang, L.-T.; Ye, L.-J.; Liu, D.; Wang, W.; Kang, X.; et al. Lactic Acid
      Promotes Metastatic Niche Formation in Bone Metastasis of Colorectal Cancer. Cell. Commun. Signal. 2021, 19, 9. [CrossRef]
61.   Wei, Y.; Xu, H.; Dai, J.; Peng, J.; Wang, W.; Xia, L.; Zhou, F. Prognostic Significance of Serum Lactic Acid, Lactate Dehydrogenase,
      and Albumin Levels in Patients with Metastatic Colorectal Cancer. BioMed Res. Int. 2018, 2018, 1804086. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.   Cruz, M.D.; Ledbetter, S.; Chowdhury, S.; Tiwari, A.K.; Momi, N.; Wali, R.K.; Bliss, C.; Huang, C.; Lichtenstein, D.; Bhattacharya,
      S.; et al. Metabolic Reprogramming of the Premalignant Colonic Mucosa Is an Early Event in Carcinogenesis. Oncotarget 2017, 8,
      20543–20557. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.   Van den Abbeele, P.; Belzer, C.; Goossens, M.; Kleerebezem, M.; De Vos, W.M.; Thas, O.; De Weirdt, R.; Kerckhof, F.-M.; Van de
      Wiele, T. Butyrate-Producing Clostridium Cluster XIVa Species Specifically Colonize Mucins in an in Vitro Gut Model. ISME J.
      2013, 7, 949–961. [CrossRef]
Cancers 2023, 15, 3065                                                                                                                  21 of 21




64.   Dalal, N.; Jalandra, R.; Sharma, M.; Prakash, H.; Makharia, G.K.; Solanki, P.R.; Singh, R.; Kumar, A. Omics Technologies for
      Improved Diagnosis and Treatment of Colorectal Cancer: Technical Advancement and Major Perspectives. BioMed Pharmacother.
      2020, 131, 110648. [CrossRef]
65.   Nitter, M.; Norgård, B.; de Vogel, S.; Eussen, S.J.P.M.; Meyer, K.; Ulvik, A.; Ueland, P.M.; Nygård, O.; Vollset, S.E.; Bjørge, T.; et al.
      Plasma Methionine, Choline, Betaine, and Dimethylglycine in Relation to Colorectal Cancer Risk in the European Prospective
      Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC). Ann. Oncol. 2014, 25, 1609–1615. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.   Simó, C.; García-Cañas, V. Dietary Bioactive Ingredients to Modulate the Gut Microbiota-Derived Metabolite TMAO. New
      Opportunities for Functional Food Development. Food Funct. 2020, 11, 6745–6776. [CrossRef]
67.   Oellgaard, J.; Winther, S.A.; Hansen, T.S.; Rossing, P.; von Scholten, B.J. Trimethylamine N-Oxide (TMAO) as a New Potential
      Therapeutic Target for Insulin Resistance and Cancer. Curr. Pharm. Des. 2017, 23, 3699–3712. [CrossRef]
68.   Li, T.; Chen, Y.; Gua, C.; Li, X. Elevated Circulating Trimethylamine N-Oxide Levels Contribute to Endothelial Dysfunction in
      Aged Rats through Vascular Inflammation and Oxidative Stress. Front. Physiol. 2017, 8, 350. [CrossRef]
69.   Anantharaju, P.G.; Reddy, B.D.; Padukudru, M.A.; Kumari Chitturi, C.M.; Vimalambike, M.G.; Madhunapantula, S.V. Naturally
      Occurring Benzoic Acid Derivatives Retard Cancer Cell Growth by Inhibiting Histone Deacetylases (HDAC). Cancer Biol. Ther.
      2017, 18, 492–504. [CrossRef]
70.   Oren, A.; Garrity, G.M. Valid publication of the names of forty-two phyla of prokaryotes. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 2021,
      71, 005056. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
