             cancers
Article
Exploring the Relationship between the Gut Mucosal Virome
and Colorectal Cancer: Characteristics and Correlations
Gangping Li 1,† , Yu Jin 1,† , Baolong Chen 2 , Aiqiang Lin 2 , Erchuan Wang 1 , Fenghua Xu 1 , Gengcheng Hu 1 ,
Chuanxing Xiao 2 , Hongli Liu 3 , Xiaohua Hou 1 , Bangzhou Zhang 4, * and Jun Song 1, *

                                            1   Division of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
                                                Technology, Wuhan 430022, China; ligangping@hust.edu.cn (G.L.); jinjoey@hust.edu.cn (Y.J.);
                                                2010xh1051@hust.edu.cn (E.W.); xufenghua999@163.com (F.X.); hugengcheng@sina.com (G.H.);
                                                houxh@hust.edu.cn (X.H.)
                                            2   Xiamen Treatgut Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Xiamen 361115, China; chenbaolong@treatgut.com (B.C.);
                                                linaiqiang@treatgut.com (A.L.); xiaoxx@treatgut.com (C.X.)
                                            3   Cancer Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
                                                Wuhan 430022, China; hongli_liu@hust.edu.cn
                                            4   Institute for Microbial Ecology, School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China
                                            *   Correspondence: geebzbz@xmu.edu.cn (B.Z.); song111jun@126.com (J.S.)
                                            †   These authors contributed equally to this work.


                                            Simple Summary: This study is for the first time to analyze the mucosal virome in patients with
                                            colorectal cancer (CRC) compared to healthy controls and show the differences between them. Unlike
                                            the changes in fecal virome in CRC (mainly associated with bacteriophages), this study revealed
                                            that the difference in the mucosal virome between CRC and HCs was dominated by eukaryotic
                                            viruses other than bacteriophages. The enrichment of TTV, one sub-species of Anelloviridae, in CRC
                                            tissues suggests that they may play an important oncogenic role in CRC, which will pave the way for
                                            innovative therapeutic strategies blocking or reverting CRC pathogenesis in the future.

                                            Abstract: The fecal virome has been reported to be associated with CRC. However, little is known
Citation: Li, G.; Jin, Y.; Chen, B.; Lin,
                                            about the mucosal virome signature in CRC. This study aimed to determine the viral community
A.; Wang, E.; Xu, F.; Hu, G.; Xiao, C.;     within CRC tissues and their contributions to colorectal carcinogenesis. Colonic mucosal biopsies
Liu, H.; Hou, X.; et al. Exploring the      were harvested from patients with CRC (biopsies of both neoplasia and adjacent normal tissue (CRC-
Relationship between the Gut                A)) and healthy controls (HC). The shot-gun metagenomic sequencing of virus-like particles (VLPs)
Mucosal Virome and Colorectal               was performed on the biopsies. Viral community, functional pathways, and their correlations to
Cancer: Characteristics and                 clinical data were analyzed. Fluorescence in situ hybridizations (FISH) for the localization of viruses
Correlations. Cancers 2023, 15, 3555.       in the intestine was performed, as well as quantitative PCR for the detection of Torque teno virus load
https://doi.org/10.3390/                    in human mucosal VLP DNA. A greater number and proportion of core species were found in CRC
cancers15143555
                                            tissues than in CRC-A and HC tissues. The diversity of the mucosal virome in CRC tissues was
Academic Editor: Takuji Tanaka              significantly increased compared to that in HC and CRC-A tissues. The mucosal virome signature
                                            of CRC tissues were significantly different from those of HC and CRC-A tissues at the species level.
Received: 10 May 2023
                                            The abundances of eukaryotic viruses from the Anelloviridae family and its sub-species Torque teno
Revised: 1 July 2023
                                            virus (TTV) were significantly higher in CRC patients than in HC. Furthermore, increased levels
Accepted: 3 July 2023
Published: 9 July 2023
                                            of TTV in the intestinal lamina propria were found in the CRC group. Multiple viral functions of
                                            TTV associated with carcinogenesis were enriched in CRC tissues. We revealed for the first time that
                                            the mucosal virobiota signature of CRC is characterized by a higher diversity and more eukaryotic
                                            viruses. The enrichment of TTV species in CRC tissues suggests that they may play an oncogenic role
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.           in CRC. Targeting eukaryotic viruses in the gut may provide novel strategies for the prevention and
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.          treatment of CRC.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
                                            Keywords: gut mucosal virome; colorectal cancer; eukaryotic viruses; Anelloviridae; Torque teno virus
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).




Cancers 2023, 15, 3555. https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15143555                                                https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cancers
Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                                                                           2 of 15




                         1. Introduction
                               A total of 2.2 million cancer cases were attributed to infection in 2018. Approximately
                         60% of new cancers are associated with viral infection [1]. Viruses are the most abundant
                         and widely distributed biological entities in the intestine [2]. Permanent and latent viral
                         infections affect the physiology and pathology of the intestine [3]. CRC is the third most
                         diagnosed malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer-related death [4]. The
                         development of CRC is influenced by both environmental and genetic factors [5]. Although
                         the gut bacteria are the most frequently investigated microbiota in CRC-related studies [6],
                         growing evidence has highlighted that dysbiosis of the gut virome is responsible for a
                         direct or indirect effect on CRC. Establishing a direct link between the intestinal virome and
                         CRC will pave the way for the development of innovative therapeutic strategies blocking
                         or reverting CRC pathogenesis [7].
                               The human virome is a diverse and abundant collection of all viruses found in or on
                         humans and includes both eukaryotic and prokaryotic viruses, encompassing both animal-
                         infecting viruses and bacteriophages [8]. Bacteriophages populating the gut microbiota
                         act as predators of bacterial species and maintain the bacterial species diversity of the
                         intestinal tract through predator–prey relationships [9], which suggests an indirect effect
                         on gastrointestinal health and physiology. Indeed, two studies reported that the fecal
                         virome (including bacteriophages) plays an indirect role in impacting CRC by modulating
                         the associated bacterial community [10,11]. However, this put a magnification lens on
                         bacteriophages, inevitably leading to disregard eukaryotic-infecting viruses that were only
                         identified by chance upon stool analysis and are therefore underestimated [7]. Multiple
                         cancers are directly associated with viral infection by human papillomavirus, hepatitis
                         B virus and hepatitis C virus [1]. Therefore, it is urgent to detect the viral signature in
                         colorectal tissues which may represent a more direct association between the virus and
                         development of CRC. Additionally, the most used method to detect a viral sequence within
                         a sample is polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which creates a large hurdle for discriminating
                         viral/phage abundance and diversity because of the limited available references on which
                         primers are designed [12]. Metagenomics represents an unbiased approach to uncover the
                         viral communities within a sample, but there is a lack of reports about CRC tissue-related
                         viral signatures using this approach.
                               Here, we performed a study to reveal the gut mucosal virome alterations in CRC
                         compared to HC using the metagenomic sequencing of VLPs. To our knowledge, this is the
                         first study to characterize the virome of CRC tissues and to show the association of these
                         virome compositions and functions with clinical characteristics. These data supplied direct
                         information about potential oncogenic viruses in CRC.

                         2. Materials and Methods
                         2.1. Cohort Description and Study Participants
                               Twenty-four clinical primary diagnoses of CRC patients and 18 HCs who provided
                         informed consent were included in this study. Participants who underwent colonoscopy
                         with standard bowel preparation at the Endoscopy Center of Wuhan Union Hospital were
                         recruited. The CRC diagnoses were confirmed by a pathologist. HC referred to participants
                         who underwent colonoscopy and had no positive findings, such as polyps and inflamma-
                         tion. Patients who had consumed prebiotics, yogurt and antibiotic or antiviral drugs within
                         3 months were excluded. Patients who had a coexisting disease, such as inflammatory
                         bowel disease, liver diseases, and pulmonary, cardiovascular or renal comorbidities were
                         excluded. Demographic data such as age, sex, and stages of TNM and cancer differentiation
                         were collected. Patient metadata are shown in Supplementary Table S1. Four biopsies of
                         each subject were harvested from the tumor (CRC) and adjacent normal mucosa (approxi-
                         mately 5 cm from the tumor lesion, CRC-A) of CRC patients or from the normal mucosa of
                         HC, and 3 biopsies were used for sequencing. Biopsies were collected via endoscopy and
                         then stored at −80 ◦ C until downstream mucosal virome analysis. Samples from 18 CRC
                         patients and 15 HCs were included in virome analysis.
Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                                                                            3 of 15




                         2.2. Mucosal VLP Enrichment and Sequencing
                               The VLPs of mucosal biopsies were enriched using a protocol modified from pre-
                         viously described methods [13]. Briefly, each mucosal biopsy was cut into small pieces
                         with surgical scissors and digested in 1 mL digestion buffer (1 mg/mL collagenase D, 1 U
                         baseline DNase I, PBS, pH 7.5) at 37 ◦ C for 1 h, with intermittent intensive vertexing every
                         20 min. The biopsy suspension was then centrifuged at 5000× g for 5 min, and the super-
                         natant was further passed through a 0.22 µm filter to remove debris and residual host and
                         bacterial cells. To degrade and remove the remaining bacterial and host cell membranes,
                         filtrate samples were treated with lysozyme (1 mg/mL at 37 ◦ C for 30 min) followed by
                         chloroform (0.2× volume at room temperature (RT) for 10 min) and centrifuged at 1500× g
                         for 5 min. Non-VLP DNA in the supernatant was digested at 37 ◦ C for 60 min by a DNase
                         cocktail (14 U Turbo DNase (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA), 250 U Benzonase Nuclease
                         (Yeasen, Shanghai, China)) and 2 U RNase A (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), followed by
                         heat inactivation of nucleases at 65 ◦ C for 10 min. VLP DNA was then extracted using the
                         PureLink Viral RNA/DNA Mini Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) accord-
                         ing to the operating instructions. VLP DNA was amplified for 4 h using the Discover-sc
                         Single Cell Kit V2 Kit (Vazyme, Nanjing, China) following the instructions provided by
                         the manufacturer and quantified by a Qubit 3.0 fluorimeter (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA,
                         USA). Both VLP DNAs and the negative control (Nuclease-free ddH2 O) were amplified
                         for 4 h by multiple displacement amplification (MDA) and were detected by agarose gel
                         electrophoresis; our data (not shown) showed that all samples had obvious dispersion
                         bands with a size of about 400 bp–1000 bp, while the negative control did not have a such
                         similar band, except for the weak primer dimer at the bottom of the electrophoretic lane.
                               DNA samples (200 ng) were randomly fragmented into 350 bp fragments with an
                         Ultrasonic Breaker Bioruptor NGS Sonicator (Diagenode, Liège, Belgium) and subjected
                         to library preparation with an NEBNext® Ultra™ II DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina
                         according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The qualified library was sequenced with 151
                         bp read chemistry in a paired-end flow cell on an Illumina NovaSeq platform (Illumina,
                         Inc., San Diego, CA, USA).

                         2.3. Read Assembly and Taxonomic Assignment and Bioinformatics Analysis
                              Raw paired-end reads were quality-filtered and analyzed using an in-house pipeline
                         that mainly included three steps. First, raw reads were filtered by Trimmomatic to remove
                         low-quality reads and adaptors [14]. High-quality reads contaminated from the human host
                         were removed from the dataset by mapping reads to the human sequence database (hg19)
                         using KneadData 15. Finally, the remaining reads were taxonomically classified using
                         Kraken2 by mapping to a reference database that contains archaea, bacteria, fungi, and
                         viruses [15]. Nonviral taxa were removed from the taxonomy table, and all samples were
                         resampled to an even sequencing depth for downstream analyses. Additionally, to assess
                         the functions of the virome, all viral sequences were retrieved and assembled into contigs by
                         Megahit [16]. Open reading frames were predicted from contigs using MetaGeneMark [17].
                         Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)-pathway enrichment analysis of the
                         genes was implemented using KOBAS software 2.0with the default parameters [18].

                         2.4. Quantitative PCR for Detection of Torque Teno Virus Load in Human Mucosal VLPs DNA
                              TTV DNA-load quantification was carried out with a TaqMan real-time PCR targeting
                         a highly conserved segment of the untranslated region (UTR) of the viral genome [19].
                         The following primers and probe were used for PCR amplification [20]: forward primer
                         50 -GTGCCGIAGGTGAGTTTA-30 , reverse primer 50 -AGCCCGGCCAGTCC-30 , probe 50 -
                         TCAAGGGGCAATTCGGGCT-30 . The PCR amplification was performed with the Applied
                         Biosystems 7300 Plus Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA)
                         using the following reaction conditions: 50 ◦ C for 2 min, 95 ◦ C for 1 min, followed by
                         40 cycles of 95 ◦ C of 15 s and 60 ◦ C of 60 s. The cycle threshold (Ct) values for each sample
Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                                                                           4 of 15




                         were used for subsequent analysis. The Ct value is defined by the number of cycles in
                         qPCR required for the fluorescent signal to cross the threshold.

                         2.5. In Situ Hybridization of TT Virus-DNA in the Intestine
                              Digoxigenin-dUTP-labeled DNA probe was designed according to the TT virus se-
                         quence in GenBank: AY823988.1, and the sequence of primer as follows: 50 -ACCAGAAGCA
                         CCACAACACGTGGAGCTATCCCAACAACCA-30 ; 50 -ATTGGCAACAGAGATGGTGGC
                         CCAGATTCAGCTTTCAGAG-30 . Freshly dissected tissue was fixed (<3 mm thick) with
                         2% paraformaldehyde from 1 h to overnight at room temperature. The tissue was rinsed
                         with running tap water and the tissue was dehydrated. The tissue was cleared in xylene
                         and immersed in paraffin, and the paraffin-embedded tissue block was sectioned at 4 µm
                         thickness on a microtome and float in a water bath containing distilled water. The sections
                         were transferred onto glass slides suitable for immunohistochemistry. The slides were
                         dried overnight and stored at room temperature until ready for use. Deparaffinized slides
                         in xylene were blocked endogenous peroxidase activity by incubating sections in 3% H2 O2
                         solution in methanol at room temperature. Sections were digested by adding 3% citric acid
                         freshly diluted pepsin (1 mL of 3% citric acid plus 2 drops of concentrated pepsin, mixed)
                         at 37 ◦ C temperature for 10 min, then in situ hybridization with PBS was performed. A
                         volume of 100 µL blocking buffer (e.g., 10% fetal bovine serum in PBS) was added onto
                         the sections of the slides and incubated in a humidified chamber at room temperature for
                         1 h. A volume of 20 µL digoxigenin-dUTP-labeled DNA probe was applied to the sections
                         on the slides and incubated in a humidified chamber at room temperature for 1 h, and
                         100 µL appropriately diluted biotinylated secondary antibody (using the antibody dilution
                         buffer) was applied to the sections on the slides and incubated in a humidified chamber
                         at room temperature for 30 min. A volume of 100 µL appropriately diluted Biotinylated
                         Anti-Digoxin was applied to the sections on the slides and incubated in a humidified cham-
                         ber at room temperature for 30 min. The slides were washed in PBS for 5 min, four times,
                         then incubated with SABC-FITC at 37 ◦ C temperature for 60 min. The nucleus with DAPI
                         was re-stained and the color of the antibody staining in the tissue sections was observed
                         under microscopy.

                         2.6. Statistical Analysis and Visualization
                              Viral alpha diversity including Shannon and Pielou’s evenness (J’) was calculated using
                         the R package vegan (v2.5.7). The significance of the differences measured in α-diversity
                         metrics among groups was tested using a nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis rank sum test
                         and Benjamini–Hochberg corrections with the R package agricolae (v1.3.3). Differences
                         in community structure (β-diversity) were visualized using NMDS based on Bray–Curtis
                         distances. The significance was determined by PERMANOVA with 999 permutations using
                         adonis in the R package vegan. Differences in viral taxa and KEGG pathways were also
                         tested using the Kruskal–Wallis rank sum test and Benjamini–Hochbery corrections with
                         the R package agricolae. A p-value less than 0.05 as statistically different. The results were
                         visualized using the custom R script mainly based on ggplot2 (v3.3.3). All analyses were
                         performed using R v3.4.1.

                         3. Results
                         3.1. Overall Data from the Three Groups
                               The median ages of the CRC patients and HC were 57 and 51, respectively. A propor-
                         tion of 60% of participants in the HC group were female while 66.7% of participants in the
                         CRC group were female. Age and gender were comparable between CRC patients and HC
                         (all p > 0.05, Table 1).
                         Table 1. Characteristics of participants.

Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                             HC                           CRC                              5 of p
                                                                                                                                      15

                                  Age, years                  51 (31–67)                     57( 49–79)                           >0.05
                            Gender female, n (%)              11 (61.1%)                     16 (66.7%)                           >0.05
                         Table 1. Characteristics of participants.
                                Size of tumor                       -                        18.08 cm2                              -
                         Stage of TNM, Early CRC                                   HC                 CRC                  p
                                                                    -                        12 (50%)                                -
                              (stage I & II),
                                           Age,n%years                          51 (31–67)        57 (49–79)             >0.05
                                      Gender female, n (%)
                                Differentiation                     -           11 (61.1%)        16 (66.7%)             >0.05       -
                                         Size of tumor                               -            18.08 cm2                -
                           StageWell  & Moderate
                                 of TNM, Early CRC (stage I & II),-n%                -           1912 (50%)                -         -
                                      Poor
                                        Differentiation             -                -            5                        -         -
                                         Well & Moderate                             -                 19                  -
                                               Poor                                  -                 5                   -
                              Previous data showed that the intestinal virome is individual-specific. Herein, w
                         accessed the distribution of viral species in all samples of diﬀerent groups. More uniqu
                              Previous data showed that the intestinal virome is individual-specific. Herein, we
                         viral species which were shared by less than 20% of samples were detected in HC an
                         accessed the distribution of viral species in all samples of different groups. More unique
                         CRC-A     tissues
                         viral species      but were
                                        which    not inshared
                                                         CRC bytissues   (Figure
                                                                  less than   20%1a).   In termswere
                                                                                    of samples                             and whic
                                                                                                                  in HCspecies
                                                                                                       detected viral
                                                                                                   of common
                         were
                         CRC-A  shared
                                  tissues in 20–50%
                                           but not      of tissues
                                                   in CRC  samples,     the 1a).
                                                                    (Figure HC In group    had the
                                                                                     terms of  common highest   numbers
                                                                                                         viral species  which  of specie
                         followed
                         were  sharedby in
                                         CRC-A,    while the
                                            20–50% of          CRC
                                                        samples,       group
                                                                   the HC      had the
                                                                            group        smallest
                                                                                     had the        number
                                                                                              highest  numbers   species
                                                                                                               of of         (Figure 1a
                                                                                                                      species,
                         followed bythe
                         However,          opposite
                                        CRC-A,   whiletrend  wasgroup
                                                        the CRC    shown    inthe
                                                                          had   thesmallest
                                                                                     core species
                                                                                             number  which         detected
                                                                                                             was(Figure
                                                                                                      of species            1a).in at lea
                         50%   of allthe
                         However,        oppositemore
                                       samples;     trend was  shown
                                                          species   andinathe core species
                                                                            higher           which of
                                                                                      proportion         detected
                                                                                                    wascore               least found i
                                                                                                                    in atwere
                                                                                                              species
                         50%  of all  samples;  more   species and   a higher  proportion    of core species
                         CRC tissues than in the HC and CRC-A (Figure 1b). The intestinal virome in HC        were   found    in was in
                         CRC tissues than in the HC and CRC-A (Figure 1b). The intestinal virome in HC was
                         dividual-specific but the viromes in CRC tissues had a similar signature. These data ind
                         individual-specific but the viromes in CRC tissues had a similar signature. These data
                         cate thatthat
                         indicate    CRCCRC patients
                                              patientsshare
                                                        shareaaunique     mucosalvirome
                                                                unique mucosal       virome    characteristic.
                                                                                            characteristic.




                          Figure 1.
                         Figure    1.Distribution
                                       Distribution  of of
                                                        shared  viral
                                                           shared     species
                                                                    viral     in HC,
                                                                          species  inCRC-A    and CRC
                                                                                      HC, CRC-A      and   CRCCore
                                                                                                        group.    group.  Core(detected
                                                                                                                       species   species (detecte
                          in at least 50%  of the samples),   common    species
                         in at least 50% of the samples), common species (shared in 20–50% of the samples) species
                                                                                (shared in 20–50%  of the samples)   and unique   and unique sp
                          (detected
                         cies         in equal
                                (detected   in or  less than
                                                equal         20%than
                                                         or less   of the samples)
                                                                        20%  of theare shown. In
                                                                                     samples)   arepanel
                                                                                                     shown.      one
                                                                                                          (a,b),In   column
                                                                                                                   panel      represents
                                                                                                                          (a,b), one column rep
                         resents    one(a).
                          one patient.       Absolute
                                          patient.   (a).number.
                                                          Absolute(b).number.
                                                                       Relative number   of detected
                                                                                 (b). Relative       species
                                                                                                number     of in relationship
                                                                                                               detected       to sharing
                                                                                                                          species  in relationsh
                          characteristics  in  three  different groups.
                         to sharing characteristics in three diﬀerent groups.
                         3.2. Increased Viral Diversity and Richness in CRC Tissues
                         3.2. Increased  Viralwas
                               Viral diversity Diversity
                                                  used toand Richness
                                                          show         in CRC Tissues
                                                               the distribution, relative abundance, and interindivid-
                         ual Viral   diversity
                             differences in      wasonused
                                            viruses    the to  show the
                                                           biodiversity    distribution,
                                                                        dimension         relative
                                                                                   in different     abundance,
                                                                                                ecosystems.      and interind
                                                                                                            According
                         to the above  data,  CRC   exhibited a virome   signature with  more  core species and
                         vidual diﬀerences in viruses on the biodiversity dimension in diﬀerent ecosystems. A   fewer
                         cording   to the than
                         unique species   above thedata,
                                                    HCs CRC
                                                         and CRC-A    tissues.
                                                               exhibited        Then, we
                                                                            a virome      evaluated
                                                                                      signature   with  differences
                                                                                                     themore        in
                                                                                                              core species an
                         biodiversity among these three groups using Shannon diversity. We observed an increasing
                         fewer unique species than the HCs and CRC-A tissues. Then, we evaluated the diﬀerence
                         trend in diversity from the HC to CRC (p = 0.013, compared to HC) (Figure 2a). We also
                         in biodiversity among these three groups using Shannon diversity. We observed an in
                         creasing trend in diversity from the HC to CRC (p = 0.013, compared to HC) (Figure 2a
                         data suggest that diversity of non-bacteriophages other than bacteriophages in CRC pa-
                         tients increased.
                              For high individual specificity in the human gut virome, we compared the distribu-
                         tion of species among the three groups. The CRC group showed a higher evenness index
Cancers 2023, 15, 3555   than the HC and CRC-A groups (p = 0.0018 and p = 0.016) (Figure 2c). There were6no             sig-
                                                                                                                    of 15
                         nificant diﬀerences in the evenness index between the HC and CRC-A groups (p = 0.4).
                         Similarly, in terms of bacteriophages, there were no significant alterations in the evenness
                         index  among these three groups (all p > 0.05) (Figure 2d). These data indicate that altera-
                           separately analyzed the diversity of bacteriophages and found no significant alterations in
                         tion in the diversity
                           Shannon   number of    non-bacteriophage
                                               among                  viruses
                                                      these three groups (all p decreased   the variation
                                                                                > 0.05) (Figure 2b). Theseof thesuggest
                                                                                                           data  distribu-
                         tion in CRC.
                           that diversity of non-bacteriophages other than bacteriophages in CRC patients increased.




                           Figure 2. Biodiversity of the whole viral community and phage in HCs and CRC patients. (a) Shannon
                           index2.ofBiodiversity
                         Figure      whole viral of the wholein
                                                 community    viral community
                                                                three          and
                                                                      groups. (b)  phage in
                                                                                  Shannon index and
                                                                                            HCsof   CRC patients.
                                                                                                  phages           (a) Shan-
                                                                                                         in three groups.
                         non index of whole viral community in three groups. (b) Shannon index of phages in three groups.
                           (c) Evenness of whole viral community in three groups. (d) Evenness of phages in three groups
                         (c). Evenness of whole viral community in three groups. (d) Evenness of phages in three groups. (p
                           (p values were FDR corrected).
                         values were FDR corrected.).
                                For high individual specificity in the human gut virome, we compared the distribution
                         3.3. Alteration
                           of species    in thethe
                                      among     Mucosal  Virome of
                                                   three groups.   CRC
                                                                 The   Tissues
                                                                     CRC group showed a higher evenness index than
                           the Beta
                               HC and   CRC-Ametrics
                                    diversity   groups were
                                                        (p = 0.0018
                                                               used and   p = 0.016)
                                                                      to capture      (Figure
                                                                                   viral      2c). There
                                                                                         community       were no significant
                                                                                                       diﬀerences    among he
                         three  groups.inThe
                           differences    thedata
                                              evenness
                                                  showed index  between
                                                             that the      the HC and
                                                                       mucosal           CRC-A
                                                                                 viromes of   CRCgroups  (p =
                                                                                                    tissues    0.4). Similarly,
                                                                                                            were   significantly
                           in termsfrom
                         diﬀerent    of bacteriophages,
                                          those of the HC there
                                                              andwere   no significant
                                                                    CRC-A    tissues atalterations
                                                                                          the speciesinlevel
                                                                                                        the evenness
                                                                                                              (based on index
                                                                                                                          Bray–
                           among   these three groups (all p > 0.05) (Figure  2d). These  data indicate that alteration
                         Curtis dissimilarities, ANOSIM test, p < 0.001, p = 0.0039, Figure 3a), while no diﬀerence     in the
                           number of non-bacteriophage viruses decreased the variation of the distribution in CRC.

                           3.3. Alteration in the Mucosal Virome of CRC Tissues
                                Beta diversity metrics were used to capture viral community differences among the
                           three groups. The data showed that the mucosal viromes of CRC tissues were significantly
                           different from those of the HC and CRC-A tissues at the species level (based on Bray–Curtis
                           dissimilarities, ANOSIM test, p < 0.001, p = 0.0039, Figure 3a), while no difference was found
Cancers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                   7 of 15
 Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                                                                                               7 of 15



                                 was found between HC and CRC-A tissues (ANOSIM test, p = 0.22). We also measured
                                  between
                                 the        HC and
                                      diﬀerence   in CRC-A   tissues
                                                     detectable      (ANOSIM test,
                                                                 bacteriophage      p = 0.22).
                                                                                species   amongWeHC,
                                                                                                  also CRC-A
                                                                                                       measured   theCRC
                                                                                                                and   difference
                                                                                                                           tissues
                                  in detectable  bacteriophage   species among  HC,  CRC-A    and CRC   tissues
                                 (Figure 3b), but we could not separate the CRC community from the HC and CRC-A (Figure 3b), com-
                                                                                                                              but
                                 we could not separate the CRC community from the HC and CRC-A communities by
                                 munities by mucosal bacteriophage species (p = 0.787, Figure 3b). There was the same
                                  mucosal bacteriophage species (p = 0.787, Figure 3b). There was the same trend in the
                                 trend in the PCA analysis based on the whole virome, non-bacteriophage and bacterio-
                                  PCA analysis based on the whole virome, non-bacteriophage and bacteriophage among
                                 phage among these three groups (Figure 3c–e). To determine the contribution of mucosal
                                  these three groups (Figure 3c–e). To determine the contribution of mucosal bacteriophage
                                 bacteriophage and non-bacteriophage species in the discrimination of diﬀerent viral com-
                                  and non-bacteriophage species in the discrimination of different viral communities, we
                                 munities, we evaluated the contributions of bacteriophages and non-bacteriophages (eu-
                                  evaluated the contributions of bacteriophages and non-bacteriophages (eukaryotic viruses
                                 karyotic
                                  and otherviruses
                                             viruses)and  otherS1).
                                                       (Figure   viruses) (Figure S1).ofThe
                                                                    The contribution        contribution
                                                                                         Anelloviridae wasofhigher
                                                                                                              Anelloviridae
                                                                                                                    than thatwas
                                                                                                                               of
                                 higher   than  that  of phages   (49.7%  vs. 47%). These   data suggest   that
                                 phages (49.7% vs. 47%). These data suggest that mucosal virome dysbiosis in CRCmucosal   virome
                                                                                                                             was
                                 dysbiosis
                                  dominated inby
                                               CRC   was dominated by non-bacteriophages.
                                                  non-bacteriophages.




                                  Figure 3.
                                 Figure       Beta diversity of the whole viral community,
                                           3. Beta                               community,eukaryotic
                                                                                              eukaryoticviruses
                                                                                                           virusesand
                                                                                                                   andphages
                                                                                                                        phagesamong
                                                                                                                                amongHCs,HCs,
                                 CRC-A
                                  CRC-A and and CRC
                                                 CRC group. (a) ANOSIM analysis of the   the whole
                                                                                             whole viral
                                                                                                    viralcommunity
                                                                                                          communityamong
                                                                                                                       amongthree
                                                                                                                               threegroups.
                                                                                                                                      groups.
                                  (b) ANOSIM
                                 (b)  ANOSIManalysis
                                                   analysisofofthe
                                                                thephages
                                                                     phagesamong
                                                                            amongthree   groups.
                                                                                     three       (c) (c)
                                                                                           groups.   PCA   analysis
                                                                                                         PCA        of the
                                                                                                               analysis    whole
                                                                                                                        of the     viralviral
                                                                                                                                whole    com-
                                 munity    among    three groups.   (d) PCA analysis  of eukaryotic  viruses in three groups.
                                  community among three groups. (d) PCA analysis of eukaryotic viruses in three groups. (e) PCA(e) PCA   anal-
                                 ysis  of the  phages  among    three groups. (p values  were FDR  corrected.).
                                  analysis of the phages among three groups (p values were FDR corrected).

                                  3.4. Distinct
                                 3.4.  Distinct Community
                                                Community of Mucosal Virome
                                                                        Virome in
                                                                                in CRC
                                                                                   CRC
                                        The fecal virome was mainly
                                       The                      mainly composed
                                                                        composedby  bybacteriophages,
                                                                                       bacteriophages,butbutlittle
                                                                                                              littleisisknown
                                                                                                                         knownabout
                                                                                                                                  about
                                  mucosal   samples.  Viral taxa were  compared   among  the HC, CRC-A    and
                                 mucosal samples. Viral taxa were compared among the HC, CRC-A and CRC groups   CRC     groups  at theat
                                  family,  genus  and species  levels. The top  three most  common    viruses   at  the
                                 the family, genus and species levels. The top three most common viruses at the family   family  level
                                  in these
                                 level      threethree
                                        in these  groups  were were
                                                       groups    Podoviridae, Anelloviridae
                                                                      Podoviridae,            and Siphoviridae.
                                                                                     Anelloviridae  and Siphoviridae. The dominant
                                                                                                                            The domi-
                                 nant    (abundance
                                  virusvirus          > 1%)> in
                                              (abundance      1%)HCin was Podoviridae,
                                                                      HC was             while
                                                                              Podoviridae,     Anelloviridae
                                                                                              while Anelloviridae was wasprevalent  in
                                                                                                                             prevalent
                                  CRC   patients (in both the CRC-A    and CRC   groups, see Supplementary     Figure
                                 in CRC patients (in both the CRC-A and CRC groups, see Supplementary Figure S2A). At    S2A). At  the
Cancers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                8 of 15



      Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                                                                                                  8 of 15
                                 the genus level, Alphatorquevirus was the dominant virus in the three groups with diﬀer-
                                 ent ratios (HC vs. CRC-A vs. CRC: 34% vs. 74% vs. 85%) (Figure S2B). Uncultured crAss-
                                 phage was the dominant viral species in the HC and CRC-A groups, while Torque teno
                                     genus level, Alphatorquevirus was the dominant virus in the three groups with different
                                 virus 22 was dominant in the CRC group. These data show that bacteriophages were the
                                     ratios (HC vs. CRC-A vs. CRC: 34% vs. 74% vs. 85%) (Figure S2B). Uncultured crAssphage
                                 dominant       viruses inviral
                                     was the dominant         the species
                                                                   HC and    in CRC-A
                                                                                 the HC and  groups
                                                                                                 CRC-A at the   family,
                                                                                                           groups,   whilegenus
                                                                                                                             Torque andtenospecies   levels,
                                                                                                                                              virus 22
                                 while   eukaryotic      viruses    were    prevalent      in  CRC    (Figure    S2C).
                                     was dominant in the CRC group. These data show that bacteriophages were the domi-
                                       At the
                                     nant        family
                                           viruses         level,
                                                      in the       compared
                                                              HC and    CRC-A to       the at
                                                                                   groups     HCthe  family,the
                                                                                                   group,         CRC
                                                                                                               genus   andgroup
                                                                                                                             speciesshowed       decreased
                                                                                                                                       levels, while
                                 levels of    Podoviridae,
                                     eukaryotic     viruses were Myoviridae,       Retroviridae
                                                                    prevalent in CRC                   and Poxviridae and increased levels of
                                                                                            (Figure S2C).
                                           At the (p
                                 Anelloviridae       family  level, (Figure
                                                          < 0.001)   compared4a).  to the
                                                                                        AtHC  thegroup,
                                                                                                   genusthe    CRC group
                                                                                                             level,            showed
                                                                                                                      Zetatorquevirus     decreased
                                                                                                                                              and   Alpha-
                                     levels
                                 torquevirus of Podoviridae,
                                                   abundances wereMyoviridae,      Retroviridae
                                                                            significantly           and in
                                                                                               increased   Poxviridae
                                                                                                                 CRC (pand     increased
                                                                                                                           < 0.001),        levels of
                                                                                                                                        while    Efquatro-
                                     Anelloviridae
                                 virus,  Eneladusvirus (p < 0.001)  (Figure 4a). At the
                                                              and Lubbockvirus,              genusconsist
                                                                                          which      level, Zetatorquevirus
                                                                                                              of bacteriophages, and Alphatorque-
                                                                                                                                        had a decreased
                                     virus abundances were significantly increased in CRC (p < 0.001), while Efquatrovirus,
                                 abundance in CRC (Figure 4b). At the species level, the abundances of uncultured crAss-
                                     Eneladusvirus and Lubbockvirus, which consist of bacteriophages, had a decreased abun-
                                 phage,
                                     danceStreptococcus
                                             in CRC (Figurephage 4b). AtEJthe1 species
                                                                                and Clostridium         phage phiCT9441A
                                                                                          level, the abundances       of uncultured were     decreased in
                                                                                                                                        crAssphage,
                                 the CRC     group, phage
                                     Streptococcus     while EJ the1 and
                                                                     abundances
                                                                           Clostridiumof phage
                                                                                           Torque teno      virus 1,
                                                                                                    phiCT9441A         Torque
                                                                                                                     were         teno in
                                                                                                                           decreased         the 3,
                                                                                                                                         virus      Torque
                                                                                                                                                  CRC
                                 tenogroup, while the abundances of Torque teno virus 1, Torque teno virus 3, Torque teno teno
                                       virus    5, Torque    teno   virus    8, Torque      teno  virus   10,  Torque    teno   virus    11,  Torque
                                 virus   12,5,Torque
                                     virus      Torquetenoteno virus    13,Torque
                                                                 virus 8,     Torqueteno teno   virus
                                                                                              virus  10,15,
                                                                                                          Torque   tenoteno
                                                                                                              Torque      virus   11, 16,
                                                                                                                                virus             teno teno
                                                                                                                                             Torque
                                                                                                                                        Torque
                                 virus   18,12,
                                     virus       Torqueteno
                                              Torque       tenovirus
                                                                 virus 19,
                                                                         13, Torque
                                                                              Torque tenotenovirus
                                                                                                virus15,20,Torque
                                                                                                              Torque teno  virus
                                                                                                                        teno            Torque
                                                                                                                                   16, 21,
                                                                                                                                virus             teno teno
                                                                                                                                             Torque
                                     virus  18,  Torque    teno  virus   19,  Torque    teno
                                 virus 22, Torque teno virus 27, and Torque teno virus 29 increased (Figure 4c). Theteno
                                                                                               virus   20, Torque    teno  virus   21,  Torque     positive
                                 ratevirus  22, Torque teno virus
                                       of Hapillomavirus,              27, and Torque
                                                                  Herpesvirus,              teno virus 29and
                                                                                     Polyomavirus           increased   (Figure
                                                                                                                 Hepatitis        4c). were
                                                                                                                              virus     The positive
                                                                                                                                               detected in
                                     rate of Hapillomavirus, Herpesvirus, Polyomavirus and Hepatitis virus were detected
                                 all samples, and data are shown in Supplement Table S1. Collectively, the number of eu-
                                     in all samples, and data are shown in Supplement Table S1. Collectively, the number of
                                 karyotic    viruses
                                     eukaryotic         increased
                                                    viruses           in CRC
                                                              increased    in CRCcompared
                                                                                     compared   to that   in HC,
                                                                                                    to that        while
                                                                                                              in HC,   while         bacteriophageabun-
                                                                                                                                 bacteriophage
                                                                                                                            thethe
                                 dance   decreased
                                     abundance           at diﬀerent
                                                    decreased           levels.levels.
                                                                 at different     TheseThesedatadata
                                                                                                  showedshowedthatthat   mucosal
                                                                                                                    thethe   mucosal     viromewas
                                                                                                                                      virome       wasdom-
                                 inated   by   eukaryotic      viruses,   especially     by   the Anelloviridae.
                                     dominated by eukaryotic viruses, especially by the Anelloviridae.




                                      Figure 4. Cont.
Cancers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                       9 of 15
    Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                                                                                            9 of 15




                                                                                                                                                .
                                    Figure 4. Altered mucosal viral composition in patients with CRC at different levels compared to
                                    HCs. 4.Different
                                 Figure      Alteredviral
                                                       mucosal   viral composition
                                                            taxa among   HCs, CRC-Ainand
                                                                                       patients
                                                                                          CRC at  with
                                                                                                    the CRC  at(a),
                                                                                                        family  diﬀerent      andcompared
                                                                                                                          levels
                                                                                                                    genus (b)      species to
                                 HCs.   Diﬀerent    viral taxa among  HCs, CRC-A    and CRC    at the family (a), genus (b) and  species
                                    levels (c). (p values were FDR corrected). The black dots represent discrete samples. Green and blue
                                                                                                                                         levels
                                 (c). (p values were FDR corrected). The black dots represent discrete samples. Green and blue dots
                                    dots indicate different groups of p-values.
                                 indicate diﬀerent groups of p-values.
                                   3.5. Increased Loads of Torque Teno Virus in CRC Tissue
                                 3.5. Increased
                                         TorqueLoads  of Torque
                                                teno virus      Teno VirusininHC
                                                           was prevalent       CRC
                                                                                 andTissue
                                                                                     CRC, and was closely related with CRC
                                    based  on metagenomic
                                       Torque    teno virus data.      We further in
                                                                was prevalent       investigated the Torque
                                                                                       HC and CRC,      and wasteno closely
                                                                                                                     virus DNA     load which
                                                                                                                              related   with CRC
                                    was  detected    by  TaqMan     real-time   PCR   among   the three  groups.
                                 based on metagenomic data. We further investigated the Torque teno virus DNA       More   TTV     DNA   loadsload
                                    were detected in CRC patients compared to HC patients (p < 0.0001, p = 0.013), and higher
                                 which was detected by TaqMan real-time PCR among the three groups. More TTV DNA
                                    TTV loads were measured in CRC than CRC-A (p = 0.00029) (Figure 5a). The increased TTV
                                 loads were detected in CRC patients compared to HC patients (p < 0.0001, p = 0.013), and
                                    DNA loads in CRC was consistent with what we found based on metagenomic data. We
                                 higher   TTV
                                    applied  FISHloads    werethe
                                                     to show     measured      in CRCtissue.
                                                                    TTV in intestine     thanThe
                                                                                               CRC-Asignals  = 0.00029)
                                                                                                          (p were   observed(Figure   5a). The in-
                                                                                                                               in all samples
                                 creased
                                    from HC,TTV    DNAand
                                               CRC-A       loadsCRC,inand
                                                                        CRC    was
                                                                            were  mostly  seen in with
                                                                                      consistent          what
                                                                                                   intestinal     we found
                                                                                                               lamina   propria. based   on meta-
                                                                                                                                    The signal
                                 genomic    data.   We    applied    FISH   to show    the  TTV  in  intestine
                                    intensity in the CRC sample was higher than that in HC and CRC-A (Figure 5b).tissue.  The   signals   were ob-
                                 servedWe in all
                                             also samples
                                                    evaluated fromtheHC,   CRC-A
                                                                      influence   of and
                                                                                     TTVsCRC,    andCRC
                                                                                            between           mostly
                                                                                                       werestages       seen
                                                                                                                      and                TTVslam-
                                                                                                                                   intestinal
                                                                                                                               in that
                                                                                                                           found
                                      propria.inThe
                                 inaincreased          signalstage
                                                   the early    intensity   in the
                                                                      of CRC.       CRC sample
                                                                               Specifically, Torquewastenohigher   than
                                                                                                            virus 15,     that in
                                                                                                                       Torque   tenoHC       CRC-
                                                                                                                                        and27,
                                                                                                                                      virus
                                    Torque  teno
                                 A (Figure 5b).    virus  28,  and  Torque   teno virus  19 were  enriched   in  stages I and   II of CRC  but
                                    decreased
                                       We alsoinevaluated
                                                    stages III and
                                                                 the IV  (Figure S3).
                                                                      influence    of TTVs between CRC stages and found that TTVs
                                 increased in the early stage of CRC. Specifically, Torque teno virus 15, Torque teno virus
                                   3.6. Altered Virome Function in CRC Tissue
                                 27, Torque teno virus 28, and Torque teno virus 19 were enriched in stages I and II of CRC
                                        To assess the functions of the mucosal virome, KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of
                                 but decreased in stages III and IV (Figure S3).
                                      the genes was performed. More abundant molecular functions, such as adhesion function,
                                      glycerophospholipid metabolism, the phosphatidylinositol signaling system, and primary
                                      bile acid biosynthesis, were identified in the CRC group but not in the HC group. The
                                      abundance of the one-carbon pool by folate, base excision repair, and the cell cycle of
                                      Caulobacter were decreased in CRC (Figure 6a). Except for the cell cycle of Caulobacter,
                                      which is related to bacteriophages, all altered functions were linked to a direct impact on
                                      tumors. We then evaluated the relationship between viral taxa and functional genes, and
                                      data showed that TTVs were positively related with functional genes which might have
                                      promoted colorectal carcinogenesis, while viruses belonging to bacteriophages were related
                                      to functional genes prohibiting carcinogenesis (Figure 6b). These data suggested TTVs
                                      might promote the colorectal carcinogenesis through increasing the oncogenic mechanisms
                                      of the virus.
PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                10 of 15
      Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                                                                                     10 of 15




                                   Figure 5. Torque teno virus DNA loads and location in HC and CRC tissue. (a) The cycle threshold
           Figure 5. Torque teno virus     DNA loads and location in HC and CRC tissue. (a) The cycle threshold
                                   (Ct) values, defined by the number of cycles in qPCR required for the fluorescent signal to cross the
           (Ct) values, defined by the number of cycles in qPCR required for the fluorescent signal to cross the
                                   threshold for each sample. (b). In situ hybridization of TT virus (TTV) DNA shows positive signals
           threshold for each sample.
                                   in the (b). In situ
                                          intestinal    hybridization
                                                     lamina propria.      of TT virus (TTV) DNA shows positive signals
           in the intestinal lamina propria.

           3.6. Altered Virome Function in CRC Tissue
                To assess the functions of the mucosal virome, KEGG pathway enrichment analysis
           of the genes was performed. More abundant molecular functions, such as adhesion func-
           tion, glycerophospholipid metabolism, the phosphatidylinositol signaling system, and
           primary bile acid biosynthesis, were identified in the CRC group but not in the HC group.
Cancers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                      11 of 15




  Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                                                                   11 of 15
                                 TTVs might promote the colorectal carcinogenesis through increasing the oncogenic
                                 mechanisms of the virus.




                                 Figure
                                   Figure6.6.Functional
                                              Functionalalterations
                                                          alterations of
                                                                      of mucosal
                                                                         mucosal virome in CRC.
                                                                                              CRC. (a)
                                                                                                     (a) Differentially
                                                                                                         Diﬀerentiallyenriched
                                                                                                                         enrichedviral
                                                                                                                                  viralfunctions
                                                                                                                                         functions
                                   betweenHCs
                                 between      HCsandandCRC
                                                        CRC groups.
                                                               groups.Diﬀerential  viral
                                                                         Differential    functions
                                                                                      viral         were
                                                                                            functions      determined
                                                                                                        were   determined    DESeq
                                                                                                                         by by      analysis
                                                                                                                                DESeq          with
                                                                                                                                         analysis
                                 FDR   correction.
                                   with FDR          Only those
                                               correction.        functions
                                                            Only those       with with
                                                                         functionsadjusted p   < 0.05p <
                                                                                          adjusted     and  Log2
                                                                                                          0.05     (between-group
                                                                                                               and Log2              fold change)
                                                                                                                           (between-group    fold
                                     are shown.
                                 >2change)         (b)
                                             > 2 are   Heatmaps
                                                     shown.        show color-coded
                                                             (b) Heatmaps               Spearman
                                                                            show color-coded        correlations
                                                                                                Spearman            of TTVs
                                                                                                             correlations    and predicted
                                                                                                                          of TTVs             func-
                                                                                                                                  and predicted
                                 tions. Red   color  indicates positive  correlation  and  blue indicates    negative  correlation. (* p < 0.05.).
                                   functions. Red color indicates positive correlation and blue indicates negative correlation (* p < 0.05).

                                 4.4.Discussion
                                      Discussion
                                        Toour
                                       To   ourknowledge,
                                                knowledge, this
                                                              this is
                                                                   is the
                                                                      the first
                                                                           first mucosal
                                                                                 mucosal virome
                                                                                          virome study
                                                                                                  studytotoreveal
                                                                                                            revealthe
                                                                                                                   theviral
                                                                                                                       viralcommu-
                                                                                                                             commu-
                                 nity alterations in patients with CRC using a dedicated metagenomics approachbased
                                  nity  alterations  in patients  with CRC    using a dedicated metagenomics    approach     basedonon
                                  enrichedvirome
                                 enriched    virome preparation.
                                                      preparation. Our
                                                                     Ourdata
                                                                          datashowed
                                                                                 showedthat
                                                                                         thatCRC
                                                                                              CRCexhibited
                                                                                                    exhibitedysbiotic mucosal
                                                                                                               dysbiotic mucosalviro-
                                                                                                                                    vi-
                                  biota  characterized   by  an increase  in  eukaryotic viruses and  a decrease in bacteriophages,
                                 robiota characterized by an increase in eukaryotic viruses and a decrease in bacterio-
                                  particularly
                                 phages,         in the tumor
                                           particularly  in thearea.
                                                                 tumorThe   abundance
                                                                        area.           of Anelloviridae
                                                                                The abundance             increased
                                                                                                of Anelloviridae    dramatically
                                                                                                                  increased        in
                                                                                                                              dramat-
                                  CRC patients, and a few TTV species were related to the TNM stage of CRC. Collectively,
                                 ically in CRC patients, and a few TTV species were related to the TNM stage of CRC.
                                  our data showed that eukaryotic viruses (mainly Anelloviridae) other than bacteriophages
                                 Collectively, our data showed that eukaryotic viruses (mainly Anelloviridae) other than
                                  were significantly altered in specific sites in CRC tissues, and we hypothesize that these
                                 bacteriophages were significantly altered in specific sites in CRC tissues, and we hypoth-
                                  viruses might play a direct role in promoting colorectal carcinogenesis.
                                 esize that these viruses might play a direct role in promoting colorectal carcinogenesis.
                                        Many works on the relationship between the gut microbiome and CRC were based on
                                  fecal samples for easy access. However, the fecal microbiota does not represent the mucosal
Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                                                                         12 of 15




                         microbial community [21]. This might also be the case for the gut virome [22]. Previous
                         data have demonstrated that the fecal virome is large and diverse, stabilizes in adulthood,
                         and is highly personalized [23]. Our data also showed highly individual differences in the
                         mucosal virome in healthy participants; however, we found that the intratumoral virome
                         exhibited more shared species in CRC patients than in HCs and CRC-A intestinal tissue,
                         which suggests a unique intratumoral viral signature in CRC. We found that the diversity of
                         the gut mucosal virome was higher in CRC patients than in HCs, which was consistent with
                         previous study that reported an increased diversity of the fecal virome in CRC patients [11].
                         However, it is noteworthy that the diversity of the gut bacteriophage community in mucosa
                         was not significantly different in CRC tissues compared to HC tissues. Since the gut virome
                         is mainly composed of eukaryotic viruses and bacteriophages [24], these results indicate
                         that eukaryotic viruses had a greater contribution to the increased diversity in CRC tissues.
                         We also found that the viral community in CRC patients significantly differed from that in
                         HC, while we failed to observe this difference based on bacteriophages. These data indicate
                         that eukaryotic viruses other than bacteriophages had a specific role in CRC, which was
                         different from what had been reported in the fecal virome [11]. Another animal study also
                         showed an increase in certain bacteriophages’ abundance with tumorigenesis [25], but
                         their data came from the fecal virome, which results in different findings. Additionally, the
                         viral community of CRC-A was different from that of CRC tissues, but not from that of HC
                         tissues, which indicates that locally altered viruses in the mucosa might participate in CRC
                         carcinogenesis. These results also show that mucosal viruses might have a direct impact on
                         CRC carcinogenesis, which coincides with the nature of eukaryotic viruses that affect host
                         cell fate by directly interacting with the host [26].
                               The role of eukaryotic viruses populated in the gut mucosa was neglected due to the
                         limitation of the detection technique [27]. Thanks to recently developed metagenomic se-
                         quencing and computational approaches, we found that eukaryotic viruses were dominant
                         in CRC patients, while bacteriophages were dominant in HCs. Permanent and latent viral
                         infections affect the physiology and pathology of the intestine [3]. We found Anelloviri-
                         dae was a dominant family within the gut eukaryotic viromes [28,29] and was correlated
                         with CRC. Anelloviridae species were previously detected in samples from one infant
                         at different times [30], indicating early and persistent infections, which implicated the
                         possibility of tumorigenesis as a cocarcinogen. Our data demonstrated that many subtypes
                         of TTV that belong to the Anelloviridae family were enriched in the tumor (not on the
                         surface of tumor) which suggested TTVs involved in CRC. TTV is known to infect various
                         cell types and can be found throughout the body, and nearly two-thirds of the general
                         population are infected with TTV. TTV is frequently found in many other biological fluids
                         (saliva, feces, urine, genital secretions, tears, nasal fluid), thus suggesting that multiple
                         methods of transmission exist. Preliminary studies suggest that there may be an associa-
                         tion between TTV and the development of certain diseases such as liver-related diseases,
                         immune-system disorders, lung diseases and neurological disorders. However, the exact
                         mechanisms linking TTV to these diseases remain unclear and further studies are needed
                         to elucidate them. Thus, to date, TTV and other AVs are regarded as “viruses waiting for a
                         disease” or “orphans of illness” [31]. Although there was no convincing direct causality
                         between TTV and any specific disease, Andrea Hettmann reported the prevalence of TTV
                         in saliva and biopsy samples from head and neck cancer patients, which suggests that
                         TTV might act as a cocarcinogen in certain cancers [32]. These studies support the idea
                         about the role of TTV as a cocarcinogen in CRC. More interestingly, Torque teno virus [13],
                         Torque teno virus 18, Torque teno virus 27, and Torque teno virus 29 increased only in CRC
                         tissues, not in CRC-A and HC. This alteration might reflect specific interactions between
                         sub-species and CRC. Previous studies have reported that a few eukaryotic viruses, such
                         as herpesviruses [33,34], papillomaviruses [35], and hepatitis B virus [36], are also related
                         to CRC, but our data showed that these viruses were not populated in the mucosa. This
                         heterogeneity may be due to the differences in methodology, geography and population [8].
                         Hence, we highlighted the role of TTV in CRC carcinogenesis.
Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                                                                                13 of 15




                              Oncogenic mechanisms of viruses generally include disrupting cell-cycle progres-
                         sion, altering metabolic reprogramming, inhibiting DNA damage repair, evading cellular
                         immune systems and shaping the bacterial community structure [8]. We observed the
                         enrichment of viral adhesion genes in CRC which might be associated with viral invasive-
                         ness [37], and we observed the enrichment of TTV in the lamina propria of the tumor and a
                         higher diversity in CRC. Lipid and bile-acid metabolism is involved in CRC [38,39], and we
                         found that the functional genes related to phosphatidylinositol, glycerophospholipid and
                         the primary bile-acid metabolism reprogramming of host cells increased in mucosal viruses
                         in CRC, probably creating conditions for viral replication [40–42], which may contribute to
                         increase the load of TTVs and promote colorectal carcinogenesis. The decreased function of
                         base excision repair in mucosal viruses of CRC could alter host genome integrity during the
                         dynamic interactions between viruses and hosts [43]. Caulobacter is a CRC-associated mi-
                         crobiota [44], and a decrease in functional gene targeting Caulobacter in CRC tissue caused
                         a decline in bacteriophages, which control the quantity of CRC-associated microbiota and
                         indirectly induce oncogenesis [8]. Here, we provided potential oncogenic mechanisms of
                         mucosal viruses in CRC based on metagenomics analysis, and further investigations are
                         required to determine these mechanisms in the future.
                              There are several limitations of our study. Firstly, the sample size was small in our
                         study. A study using a bigger sample size should be conducted in the future. Secondly,
                         although food habits might have a profound effect on the gut virome, dietary factors were
                         not addressed in the experimental design. Thirdly, methods of isolating VLPs from human-
                         associated sample matrices often utilize a combination of filtration and centrifugation
                         techniques for the concentration of VLPs, followed by the elimination of contaminating cells
                         and free nucleic acids, and so, we cannot rule out a possible DNA amplification bias and
                         host-DNA contamination. The last shortcoming of this study was the low number of known
                         viral genomes in public databases [45]. Improvements in sequencing and bioinformatics
                         techniques are needed to further investigate this viral “dark matter”.

                         5. Conclusions
                              In conclusion, this is the first attempt to investigate the intestinal mucosal viral com-
                         munity associated with CRC by viral metagenomics and highlights the importance of the
                         gut mucosal virome in CRC carcinogenesis. Mucosal virome in CRC is characterized by an
                         increased biodiversity and an increase in eukaryotic viruses (not bacteriophages), which
                         may influence host homeostasis and contribute to oncogenesis. The identified TTV species
                         belonged to the Anelloviridae family and related functional genes provided new insights
                         into CRC carcinogenesis. Targeting eukaryotic viruses (such as TTV species) in the gut may
                         provide novel strategies for the prevention and treatment of CRC.

                         Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at:
                         https://www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/cancers15143555/s1, Figure S1: The contribution of viral
                         taxa to the differences between the gut virome among the groups; Figure S2: The viral composition
                         of samples from HCs, CRC-A and CRC at different levels. Different viral taxa among HCs, CRC-A
                         and CRC at the family (a), genus (b) and species levels (c); Figure S3: Relative abundance of viral
                         species between early and late stage of CRC; Supplementary Table S1. Positive rate of Hapillomavirus,
                         Herpesvirus, Polyomavirus and Hepatitis virus in samples.
                         Author Contributions: Conceptualization, G.L., Y.J., J.S. and B.Z.; methodology, E.W., F.X. and G.H.;
                         software, B.C.; validation, A.L. and C.X.; formal analysis and investigation, B.C.; writing—original
                         draft preparation, G.L. and Y.J.; writing—review and editing, B.Z. and J.S.; visualization, B.C.;
                         supervision, X.H. and H.L.; project administration, B.Z. and J.S; resources: all authors. All authors
                         have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                         Funding: This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NO.
                         81873553 and 81800465).
Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                                                                                               14 of 15




                                   Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
                                   of Helsinki and approved by the Ethics Committee of Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University
                                   of Science and Technology (No. 2018-S377).
                                   Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
                                   Data Availability Statement: The raw sequence data reported in this paper have been deposited in
                                   the Genome Sequence Archive (Genomics, Proteomics & Bioinformatics 2017) in National Genomics
                                   Data Center (Nucleic Acids Res 2021), China National Center for Bioinformation/Beijing Institute
                                   of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, under accession number CRA004054, and are publicly
                                   accessible at https://bigd.big.ac.cn/gsa (accessed on 1 April 2022).
                                   Acknowledgments: We sincerely appreciate all the participants and the staff at the Xiamen Treatgut
                                   Biotechnology Co., Ltd.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
                                   of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
                                   in the decision to publish the results.

References
1.    De Martel, C.; Georges, D.; Bray, F.; Ferlay, J.; Clifford, G.M. Global burden of cancer attributable to infections in 2018: A
      worldwide incidence analysis. Lancet Glob. Health 2020, 8, e180–e190. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Pan, D.; Nolan, J.; Williams, K.H.; Robbins, M.J.; Weber, K.A. Abundance and Distribution of Microbial Cells and Viruses in an
      Alluvial Aquifer. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.    Seo, S.U.; Kweon, M.N. Virome-host interactions in intestinal health and disease. Curr. Opin. Virol. 2019, 37, 63–71. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
4.    Keum, N.; Giovannucci, E. Global burden of colorectal cancer: Emerging trends, risk factors and prevention strategies. Nat. Rev.
      Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2019, 16, 13–732. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.    Perillo, F.; Amoroso, C.; Strati, F.; Giuffrè, M.R.; Díaz-Basabe, A.; Lattanzi, G.; Facciotti, F. Gut Microbiota Manipulation as a
      Tool for Colorectal Cancer Management: Recent Advances in Its Use for Therapeutic Purposes. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 5389.
      [CrossRef]
6.    Wong, S.H.; Yu, J. Gut microbiota in colorectal cancer: Mechanisms of action and clinical applications. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol.
      Hepatol. 2019, 16, 690–704. [CrossRef]
7.    Massimino, L.; Lovisa, S.; Lamparelli, L.A.; Danese, S.; Ungaro, F. Gut eukaryotic virome in colorectal carcinogenesis: Is that a
      trigger? Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 2020, 19, 16–28. [CrossRef]
8.    Emlet, C.; Ruffin, M.; Lamendella, R. Enteric Virome and Carcinogenesis in the Gut. Dig. Dis. Sci. 2020, 65, 852–864. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
9.    Norman, J.M.; Handley, S.A.; Baldridge, M.T.; Droit, L.; Liu, C.Y.; Keller, B.C.; Kambal, A.; Monaco, C.L.; Zhao, G.; Fleshner,
      P.; et al. Disease-specific alterations in the enteric virome in inflammatory bowel disease. Cell 2015, 160, 447–460. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
10.   Hannigan, G.D.; Duhaime, M.B.; Ruffin, M.T., IV; Koumpouras, C.C.; Schloss, P.D. Diagnostic Potential and Interactive Dynamics
      of the Colorectal Cancer Virome. mBio 2018, 9, e02248-18. [CrossRef]
11.   Nakatsu, G.; Zhou, H.; Wu, W.K.K.; Wong, S.H.; Coker, O.O.; Dai, Z.; Li, X.; Szeto, C.-H.; Sugimura, N.; Lam, T.Y.-T.; et al.
      Alterations in Enteric Virome Are Associated with Colorectal Cancer and Survival Outcomes. Gastroenterology 2018, 155,
      529–541.e5. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Ogilvie, L.A.; Jones, B.V. The human gut virome: A multifaceted majority. Front. Microbiol. 2015, 6, 918. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   Zuo, T.; Lu, X.-J.; Zhang, Y.; Cheung, C.P.; Lam, S.; Zhang, F.; Tang, W.; Ching, J.Y.L.; Zhao, R.; Chan, P.K.S.; et al. Gut mucosal
      virome alterations in ulcerative colitis. Gut 2019, 68, 1169–1179. [CrossRef]
14.   Bolger, A.M.; Lohse, M.; Usadel, B. Trimmomatic: A flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics 2014, 30, 2114–2120.
      [CrossRef]
15.   Wood, D.E.; Lu, J.; Langmead, B. Improved metagenomic analysis with Kraken 2. Genome Biol. 2019, 20, 257. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.   Li, D.; Liu, C.M.; Luo, R.; Sadakane, K.; Lam, T.W. MEGAHIT: An ultra-fast single-node solution for large and complex
      metagenomics assembly via succinct de Bruijn graph. Bioinformatics 2015, 31, 1674–1676. [CrossRef]
17.   Zhu, W.; Lomsadze, A.; Borodovsky, M. Ab initio gene identification in metage -nomic sequences. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010, 38, e132.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.   Xie, C.; Mao, X.; Huang, J.; Ding, Y.; Wu, J.; Dong, S.; Kong, L.; Gao, G.; Li, C.-Y.; Wei, L. KOBAS 2.0: A web server for annotation
      and identification of enriched pathways and diseases. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011, 39, W316–W322. [CrossRef]
19.   Maggi, F.; Fornai, C.; Zaccaro, L.; Morrica, A.; Vatteroni, M.L.; Isola, P.; Marchi, S.; Ricchiuti, A.; Pistello, M.; Bendinelli, M. TT
      virus (TTV) loads associated with different peripheral blood cell types and evidence for TTV replication in activated mononuclear
      cells. J. Med. Virol. 2001, 64, 190–194. [CrossRef]
Cancers 2023, 15, 3555                                                                                                                  15 of 15




20.   Albert, E.; Solano, C.; Pascual, T.; Torres, I.; Macera, L.; Focosi, D.; Maggi, F.; Giménez, E.; Amat, P.; Navarro, D. Dynamics of
      Torque Teno virus plasma DNAemia in allogeneic stem cell transplant recipients. J. Clin. Virol. 2017, 94, 22–28. [CrossRef]
21.   Yang, M.; Hong, G.; Jin, Y.; Li, Y.; Li, G.; Hou, X. Mucosal-associated microbiota other than luminal microbiota has a close
      relationship with diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2020, 10, 515614. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
22.   Barr, J.J.; Auro, R.; Furlan, M.; Whiteson, K.L.; Erb, M.L.; Pogliano, J.; Stotland, A.; Wolkowicz, R.; Cutting, A.S.; Doran, K.S.; et al.
      Bacteriophage adhering to mucus provide a non-host-derived immunity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2013, 110, 10771–10776.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.   Virgin, H.W. The virome in mammalian physiology and disease. Cell 2014, 157, 142–150. [CrossRef]
24.   Beller, L.; Matthijnssens, J. What is (not) known about the dynamics of the human gut virome in health and disease. Curr. Opin.
      Virol. 2019, 37, 52–57. [CrossRef]
25.   Li, Y.; Zhang, F.; Zheng, H.; Kalasabail, S.; Hicks, C.; Fung, K.Y.; Preaudet, A.; Putoczki, T.; Beretov, J.; Millar, E.K.A.; et al. Fecal
      DNA Virome Is Associated with the Development of Colorectal Neoplasia in a Murine Model of Colorectal Cancer. Pathogens
      2022, 11, 457. [CrossRef]
26.   Metzger, R.N.; Krug, A.B.; Eisenächer, K. Enteric Virome Sensing—Its Role in Intestinal Homeostasis and Immunity. Viruses 2018,
      10, 1466. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.   Ungaro, F.; Massimino, L.; Furfaro, F.; Rimoldi, V.; Peyrin-Biroulet, L.; D’alessio, S.; Danese, S. Metagenomic analysis of intestinal
      mucosa revealed a specific eukaryotic gut virome signature in early-diagnosed inflammatory bowel disease. Gut Microbes 2019,
      10, 149–158. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.   Shulman, L.M.; Davidson, I. Viruses with Circular Single-Stranded DNA Genomes Are Everywhere! Annu. Rev. Virol. 2017, 4,
      159–180. [CrossRef]
29.   Ungaro, F.; Massimino, L.; D’Alessio, S.; Danese, S. The gut virome in inflammatory bowel disease pathogenesis: From
      metagenomics to novel therapeutic approaches. United Eur. Gastroenterol. J. 2019, 7, 999–1007. [CrossRef]
30.   Lim, E.S.; Zhou, Y.; Zhao, G.; Bauer, I.K.; Droit, L.; Ndao, I.M.; Warner, B.B.; Tarr, P.I.; Wang, D.; Holtz, L. Early life dynamics of
      the human gut virome and bacterial microbiome in infants. Nat. Med. 2015, 21, 1228–1234. [CrossRef]
31.   Pietro, G.S.; Daniele, F.; Andreina, B.; Federica, N.; Francesca, D.F.; Fabrizio, C.; Minosse, C.; Matusali, G.; Maggi, F. TTV and
      other anelloviruses: The astonishingly wide spread of a viral infection. Asp. Mol. Med. 2023, 1, 100006, ISSN 2949-6888.
32.   Hettmann, A.; Demcsák, A.; Bach, Á.; Decsi, G.; Dencs, Á.; Pálinkó, D.; Rovó, L.; Nagy, K.; Minarovits, J.; Takács, M. Detection
      and Phylogenetic Analysis of Torque Teno Virus in Salivary and Tumor Biopsy Samples from Head and Neck Carcinoma Patients.
      Intervirology 2016, 59, 123–129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.   Cantalupo, P.G.; Katz, J.P.; Pipas, J.M. Viral sequences in human cancer. Virology 2018, 513, 208–216. [CrossRef]
34.   Salyakina, D.; Tsinoremas, N.F. Viral expression associated with gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas in TCGA high-throughput
      sequencing data. Hum. Genom. 2013, 7, 23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.   Lui, R.N.; Tsoi, K.K.; Ho, J.M.; Lo, C.; Chan, F.C.; Kyaw, M.H.; Sung, J.J. Global Increasing Incidence of Young-Onset Colorectal
      Cancer Across 5 Continents: A Joinpoint Regression Analysis of 1,922,167 Cases. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 2019, 28,
      1275–1282.
36.   Su, F.-H.; Le, T.N.; Muo, C.-H.; Te, S.A.; Sung, F.-C.; Yeh, C.-C. Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection Associated with Increased
      Colorectal Cancer Risk in Taiwanese Population. Viruses 2020, 12, 97. [CrossRef]
37.   Maginnis, M.S. Virus-Receptor Interactions: The Key to Cellular Invasion. J. Mol. Biol. 2018, 430, 2590–2611.
38.   Pakiet, A.; Kobiela, J.; Stepnowski, P.; Sledzinski, T.; Mika, A. Changes in lipids composition and metabolism in colorectal cancer:
      A review. Lipids Health Dis. 2019, 18, 29.
39.   Farhana, L.; Nangia-Makker, P.; Arbit, E.; Shango, K.; Sarkar, S.; Mahmud, H.; Hadden, T.; Yu, Y.; Majumdar, A.P.N. Bile acid: A
      potential inducer of colon cancer stem cells. Stem. Cell Res. Ther. 2016, 7, 181.
40.   Yuan, S.; Chu, H.; Chan, J.F.-W.; Ye, Z.-W.; Wen, L.; Yan, B.; Lai, P.-M.; Tee, K.-M.; Huang, J.; Chen, D.; et al. SREBP-dependent
      lipidomic reprogramming as a broad-spectrum antiviral target. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 120.
41.   Beziau, A.; Brand, D.; Piver, E. The Role of Phosphatidylinositol Phosphate Kinases during Viral Infection. Viruses 2020, 12, 1124.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.   Hu, M.-M.; He, W.-R.; Gao, P.; Yang, Q.; He, K.; Cao, L.-B.; Li, S.; Feng, Y.-Q.; Shu, H.-B. Virus-induced accumulation of intracellular
      bile acids activates the TGR5-β-arrestin-SRC axis to enable innate antiviral immunity. Cell. Res. 2019, 29, 193–205. [CrossRef]
43.   Weitzman, M.D.; Fradet-Turcotte, A. Virus DNA Replication and the Host DNA Damage Response. Annu. Rev. Virol. 2018, 5,
      141–164. [PubMed]
44.   Flemer, B.; Lynch, D.B.; Brown, J.M.; Jeffery, I.B.; Ryan, F.J.; Claesson, M.J.; O’Riordain, M.; Shanahan, F.; O’Toole, P.W. Tumour-
      associated and non-tumour -associated microbiota in colorectal cancer. Gut 2017, 66, 633–643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.   Shkoporov, A.N.; Hill, C. Bacteriophages of the Human Gut: The “Known Unknown” of the Microbiome. Cell Host Microbe 2019,
      25, 195–209.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
