              cancers
Article
Performance of 16S Metagenomic Profiling in Formalin-Fixed
Paraffin-Embedded versus Fresh-Frozen Colorectal
Cancer Tissues
Alessandra Borgognone 1,† , Garazi Serna 2,† , Marc Noguera-Julian 1,3 , Lidia Alonso 2 , Mariona Parera 1 ,
Francesc Català-Moll 1 , Lidia Sanchez 2 , Roberta Fasani 2 , Roger Paredes 1,3,4,5,6,7, *,‡ and Paolo Nuciforo 2, *,‡

                                            1   IrsiCaixa AIDS Research Institute, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol,
                                                08916 Badalona, Barcelona, Spain; aborgognone@irsicaixa.es (A.B.); mnoguera@irsicaixa.es (M.N.-J.);
                                                mparera@irsicaixa.es (M.P.); fcatala@irsicaixa.es (F.C.-M.)
                                            2   Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, 08035 Barcelona, Spain;
                                                gserna@vhio.net (G.S.); lalonso@vhio.net (L.A.); lsanchez@vhio.net (L.S.); rfasani@vhio.net (R.F.)
                                            3   Faculty of Medicine, University of Vic–Central University of Catalonia (UVic–UCC),
                                                08500 Vic, Barcelona, Spain
                                            4   Facultat de Medicina, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona (UAB), 08193 Barcelona, Spain
                                            5   Fight AIDS Foundation, Infectious Diseases Department, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol,
                                                08916 Badalona, Barcelona, Spain
                                            6   Infectious Diseases Service, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, 08916 Badalona, Barcelona, Spain
                                            7   Center for Global Health and Diseases, Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University,
         
                                         Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
                                            *   Correspondence: rparedes@irsicaixa.es (R.P.); pnuciforo@vhio.net (P.N.)
Citation: Borgognone, A.; Serna, G.;        †   These authors contributed equally to this work.
Noguera-Julian, M.; Alonso, L.;             ‡   These authors contributed equally to this work.
Parera, M.; Català-Moll, F.; Sanchez,
L.; Fasani, R.; Paredes, R.; Nuciforo, P.
                                            Simple Summary: The analysis of colorectal cancer (CRC) gut microbiota can reveal crucial aspects
Performance of 16S Metagenomic
                                            of carcinogenesis and variation of treatment responses. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
Profiling in Formalin-Fixed
                                            tissues represent an invaluable resource for studies in cancer genomics; however, their use in
Paraffin-Embedded versus
                                            high-throughput metagenomic studies has been questioned due to several limitations in the DNA
Fresh-Frozen Colorectal Cancer
Tissues. Cancers 2021, 13, 5421.
                                            quality. In this study, we evaluated the impact of sample preservation on CRC-associated microbiota
https://doi.org/10.3390/                    characterization. Using 16S rRNA sequencing and RNA in situ hybridization (RNA-ISH), we found
cancers13215421                             differences in the comparison between paired FFPE and fresh frozen (FF) tissues, mostly derived
                                            from contamination issues. A quality index was also outlined to potentially assess the reliability of
Academic Editor: Nathalie Rivard            microbiome profiling obtained from FFPE DNA samples. These results suggest that tissular CRC
                                            microbiome studies should preserve internal coherence by using either FFPE or FF samples but not
Received: 16 September 2021                 necessarily both.
Accepted: 26 October 2021
Published: 29 October 2021                  Abstract: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues represent the most widely available
                                            clinical material to study colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the accuracy and clinical validity of
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                            FFPE microbiome profiling in CRC is uncertain. Here, we compared the microbial composition of
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                            10 paired fresh-frozen (FF) and FFPE CRC tissues using 16S rRNA sequencing and RNA-ISH. Both
published maps and institutional affil-
                                            sample types showed different microbial diversity and composition. FF samples were enriched in
iations.
                                            archaea and representative CRC-associated bacteria, such as Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes and Fusobacteria.
                                            Conversely, FFPE samples were mainly enriched in typical contaminants, such as Sphingomonadales
                                            and Rhodobacterales. RNA-ISH in FFPE tissues confirmed the presence of CRC-associated bacteria,
                                            such as Fusobacterium and Bacteroides, as well as Propionibacterium allowing discrimination between
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                                            tumor-associated and contaminant taxa. An internal quality index showed that the degree of
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                            similarity within sample pairs inversely correlated with the dominance of contaminant taxa. Given
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
                                            the importance of FFPE specimens for larger studies in human cancer genomics, our findings may
conditions of the Creative Commons          provide useful indications on potential confounding factors to consider for accurate and reproducible
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://       metagenomics analyses.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).




Cancers 2021, 13, 5421. https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13215421                                                  https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cancers
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                            2 of 18




                         Keywords: microbiome; colorectal cancer; 16S gene sequencing; RNA in situ hybridization; FFPE




                         1. Introduction
                                Increasing advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies have provided re-
                         markable insights into the role played by the human microbiome in the host’s health
                         status and pathological conditions [1], including colorectal cancer (CRC) [2]. Comparative
                         metagenomics analyses on fecal and mucosal samples have explored the gut microbiota of
                         individuals with CRC, resulting in the identification of bacterial groups that have a critical
                         role in oncogenesis and tumor progression [3]. In particular, increased abundance of the
                         gut pathogenic bacterium Fusobacterium nucleatum in CRC patients correlated with shorter
                         survival [4], resistance to chemotherapy [5] and molecular alterations [6]. Several mechanis-
                         tic studies have hypothesized that the close interaction of diverse microbial communities
                         with host intestinal cells and immune system may induce alterations in the metabolic
                         environment, thus directly or indirectly influencing mutagenesis rate and tumor progres-
                         sion [7]. As a result, to deepen understanding in the field of tumor-associated microbiome,
                         the demand for larger cohorts of patient samples has dramatically increased. In recent
                         years, stool material has emerged as the most common biospecimen used to characterize
                         the human gut microbiota because of the non-invasive nature of its retrieval and large
                         amount of biomass. However, stool-derived profiles are generally more representative
                         of microbial communities present in the intestinal lumen rather than mucosa-associated
                         microbiota adherent to the host tissue and may be less sensitive to localized changes in the
                         surface of the colorectal wall [8]. Hence, these limitations have fueled ongoing research
                         into tissue biopsies that would more accurately reflect local mucosal communities [9].
                                At present, fresh frozen (FF)-resected tissues are considered the “gold standard” for
                         sequencing-based microbiome studies due to several advantages in preserving the DNA
                         (i.e., immediate freezing, less fragmentation, limited handling and lower contamination or
                         storage-derived issues). However, the frozen material is not collected as part of clinical
                         routine and its use is generally limited to prospective or cross-sectional analyses [10].
                                To overcome these drawbacks, the use of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimens
                         (FFPE) has been explored [11,12]. Compared with the frozen material, FFPE tissues are
                         more suitable for relatively simple long-term storage at room temperature and are widely
                         available from biobanks in pathology departments [13]. Although this biotype harbors a
                         great potential for expanding metagenomics studies (i.e., allowing access to clinical samples
                         from a wide range of locations and times), FFPE specimens carry several limitations for
                         genomic analysis [14] mostly derived from the formalin fixation process and storage that
                         negatively impact the DNA integrity (e.g., cross-linking, fragmentation, and mutations) [15].
                         In this regard, only a limited number of comparative studies have investigated the potential
                         to extract reliable information from both FF and FFPE specimens. For instance, previous
                         reports successfully used FFPE specimens to characterize the microbiota of pre-term infants
                         with necrotizing enterocolitis using 16S rRNA sequencing [16] or genomic alterations
                         in colon and breast cancers by exome capture sequencing [17]. By contrast, 16S rRNA
                         sequencing analyses of non-neoplastic gastric tissues [18] and brain specimens in a cohort
                         of Alzheimer’s patients [19] showed that the microbial community profiled in FFPE tissues
                         did not fully recapitulate that of their paired FF tissues. Recently, intratumor bacteria
                         have been successfully characterized across distinct cancer types in both FF and FFPE
                         tissues, using a multiplexed 16S rRNA sequencing protocol [20]. Nevertheless, the impact
                         of sample preservation on CRC-associated microbiota has not been fully elucidated.
                                To assess the feasibility of typing the CRC-associated microbiota from FFPE biospeci-
                         mens, the current study compared CRC-related microbiota from paired FF and FFPE tissue
                         samples using 16S rRNA sequencing. A special focus was drawn on the characterization of
                         F. nucleatum in CRC specimens from both FF and FFPE sample types. Finally, high resolu-
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                        3 of 18




                         tion in situ analyses in tumor samples was used to validate potential microbial biomarkers
                         identified by amplicon sequencing.

                         2. Materials and Methods
                         2.1. Sample Collection
                              The study group comprised 10 non-consecutive patients who were diagnosed with
                         colorectal cancer at Vall d’Hebron University Hospital between 2010 and 2014 and had
                         available FF and FFPE tissue for analysis. Clinicopathologic data is shown in Supplemen-
                         tary Table S1. All tumor samples were collected at surgery from treatment-naïve patients.
                         The study was approved by the Vall d’Hebron University Hospital institutional ethical
                         review board.

                         2.2. DNA Extraction
                              Five curls of 10µm of each FF and FFPE samples were used for the DNA extraction.
                         The minimum percentage of tumor cells was 10%, except for patient 134’s FF sample
                         where the information was missing. DNA from FF samples was extracted using the
                         DNeasy Blood&Tissue kit (50) (#69504, QIAGEN, Düsseldorf, Germany) following the
                         manufacturer’s instructions.
                              DNA from FFPE samples was extracted using the Maxwell 16 FFPE Plus LEV DNA
                         Purification kit (#AS1135, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) following the manu-
                         facturer’s instructions. Extracted DNA was then stored at −80 ◦ C until sequencing.

                         2.3. Library Preparation for Illumina MiSeq Sequencing
                              The V3–V4 variable region from the 16S rRNA gene was amplified using the primer
                         pair described in the MiSeq rRNA Amplicon Sequencing protocol developed by Illumina
                         (San Diego, CA, USA), which included forward and reverse adapters (16S_F 50 -TCG TCG
                         TCG GCA GCG TCA GAT GTG TAT AAG AGA CAG CCT ACG GGN GGC WGC AG-30 ;
                         16S_R 50 -GTC TCG TGG GCT CGG AGA TGT GTA TAA GAG ACA GGA CTA CHV
                         GGG TAT CTA ATC C-30 ). Amplifications were performed in triplicate in 25 µL reaction
                         volumes containing 12.5 µL of KAPA HiFi HotStart Ready Mix (KAPA HiFi HotStart DNA
                         Polymerase, buffer, MgCl2, and dNTPs, KAPA Biosystems Inc., Wilmington, MA, USA),
                         5 µL of each primer at 1 µM and 2.5 µL of template DNA. Thermocycling parameters
                         were as follows: initial denaturation step at 95 ◦ C for 3 min, followed by 30 cycles of
                         denaturation at 95 ◦ C for 30 s, annealing at 55 ◦ C for 30 s, extension at 72 ◦ C for 30 s
                         and a final extension step at 72 ◦ C for 10 min. A PCR reaction with DNA-free water as
                         the template (PCR no-template control) was loaded to assess for potential contamination.
                         Following amplification, PCR products were run on a 1% agarose gel electrophoresis to
                         confirm the expected amplicon size (~460 base pairs), triplicates were pooled together and
                         stored at −30 ◦ C until sequencing library preparation. Amplified DNA templates were
                         purified for non-DNA molecules and Illumina sequencing adapters and dual indices were
                         attached using Nextera XT index Kit (Illumina Inc.), followed by a corresponding PCR
                         amplification program as described in MiSeq 16S rRNA Amplicon Sequencing protocol.
                         After the second round of purification, amplicon libraries were quantified using a Quant-
                         iTTM PicoGreen® dsDNA Assay Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, MA, USA) and diluted in
                         equimolar concentrations (4 nM) for further pooling. Sequencing was performed on an
                         Illumina MiSeqTM platform (Illumina Inc.) using the paired-end 300 base-length protocol
                         at the genomics core facility in Germans Trias i Pujol research campus, in Badalona, Spain.

                         2.4. 16S rRNA Sequence Analysis
                              Sequencing outputs from the Illumina MiSeq platform were converted to fastq format
                         and demultiplexed before downloading from Illumina BaseSpace Hub. The quality of
                         raw reads was visualized using FastQC [21] and then the reads were imported into R
                         (v3.5.2) [22] for analysis with the DADA2 package (v1.10.1) [23]. The pipeline was executed
                         according to default parameters using maxEE = 4.10 in the filtering step. Briefly, reads
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                            4 of 18




                         were first filtered for quality (expected error per read ≤ 2), trimmed (10 nucleotides from
                         the start of each read) and those with <350 base pairs after filtering and trimming were
                         removed. After filtered read dereplication, consensus quality profiles were used in the
                         denoising step to correct sequencing errors and generate amplicon sequence variants
                         (ASVs). Chimeric sequences were subtracted using a consensus approach and paired-end
                         reads merged together. Taxonomy was assigned by aligning high-quality reads to the
                         Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) database [24] natively implemented in DADA2 and
                         trained against the Greengenes reference database (v13.8) [25] and the resulting ASV table
                         used for downstream analyses.

                         2.5. Statistical Analysis
                              R/phyloseq (v1.26.1) [26], vegan (v2.5-5) [27] ade4 (v1.7-13) [28] and ggplot2 (v3.2.0) [29]
                         packages were used to estimate relative abundances, diversity measures and for data vi-
                         sualization. Specifically, relative abundances of taxa were based on ASV counts and
                         normalization calculated as percentages (100 × (x/sum(x))). Alpha diversity (Shannon
                         index) was determined using the R/phyloseq ‘estimate_richness’ function on rarefied ASV
                         counts. Beta diversity measures were assessed using the Bray–Curtis and Jaccard distances
                         and calculated based on normalized ASV counts. PERMANOVA (adonis) tests (R/vegan
                         package) using Bray–Curtis and Jaccard distances were performed to test for potential
                         associations between preservation method and microbiome composition. Differences in
                         alpha diversity and relative abundances of taxa were evaluated using Wilcoxon signed-
                         rank test for pairwise comparisons. For all statistical tests, p-values lower than 0.05 were
                         considered significant. To identify discriminant bacterial signatures, the linear discriminant
                         analysis effect size (LEfSe) algorithm [30] was applied using default recommended settings
                         (α = 0.05 for pairwise Wilcoxon test and LDA score > 3). Spearman’s correlation coefficients
                         and corresponding p-values adjusted for multiple comparisons by the Benjamini–Hochberg
                         method were computed using ‘rcorr’ function within R package hmisc.

                         2.6. Species-Level Taxonomy Inference and Phylogenetic Tree Reconstruction
                              Representative ASVs were obtained using the ‘subset_taxa’ function (via R/phyloseq
                         package) for discriminating putative species classification. Amplicon sequences (fasta format)
                         were aligned to the NCBI Refseq [31] database using BLASTN [32] (max_target_seqs = 20),
                         optimizing for highly similar sequences (MegaBLAST). The resulting hits were sorted first
                         by e-value and ASVs were assigned a putative taxonomy with sequence identity ≥ 98% and
                         coverage ≥ 90%. For Fusobacterium-associated ASVs, phylogenies were built as follows: a
                         multiple alignment was computed with MUSCLE (v.3.8.31) [33]; the alignment was then
                         trimmed with trimAl (v1.4) using the ‘gappyout’ option [34]; and the tree was built with IQ-
                         TREE (v1.5.5) [35] with 1000 ultrafast bootstraps. The 16S rRNA gene reference sequences
                         of Fusobacterium spp. for phylogenetic analysis were downloaded from Pathosystems
                         Resource Integration Center (PATRIC) databases [36].

                         2.7. Microbial In Situ Hybridization (ISH) and Image Analysis
                               RNA in situ hybridization (RNA-ISH) was conducted using the RNAscope® tech-
                         nology as described in Serna et al. 2020. The following ACD probes were used: B-
                         Fusobacterium 23S RNA probe ACD (Cat nº 486411, accession no: CP003723), Propioni-
                         bacterium acnes-16S RNA probe ACD (Cat nº 313939), Bacteroides-23S probe ACD (Cat nº
                         575449) and EB-16S-rRNA probe ACD (Cat nº 464469) for total bacteria analyses. RNA-ISH
                         stained slides were digitized for signal quantification using a custom-made algorithm that
                         automatically detected and counted individual and clustered red signals corresponding to
                         bacteria mRNA molecules within a determined tumor region of interest (ROI) and within
                         the total area. Results were expressed in counts. Samples with less than 100 counts of
                         total bacteria were discarded as they failed to pass the quality control for RNA-ISH studies
                         and ISH results from these samples were excluded from the analysis. For single bacteria
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                                      5 of 18




                         analyses, samples with a minimum of 100 counts of the bacteria were considered positive
                         for the study.

                         3. Results
                         3.1. Data Processing and Quality Control
                              A total of 21 samples were sequenced with Illumina MiSeq, including 10 paired FF and
                         FFPE colorectal cancer biopsies and 1 negative PCR no-template control (NTC). Previous
                         studies have reported the presence of bacterial DNA in tissue embedding media, such
                         as paraffin [18,20]. Therefore, we initially included 10 paraffin controls (blank section
                         obtained from the margins of each paraffin block) to evaluate the impact of the embedding
                         process on microbiota profiling. After PCR amplification, V3–V4 amplicon bands were not
                         detectable on the agarose gel electrophoresis in correspondence to blank paraffin controls
                         (Figure S1). Given the extremely low microbial biomass, these samples were excluded for
                         further processing.
                              Raw sequencing data comprised 1,324,033 paired-end reads generated from 21 samples
                         (Table 1). All filtered samples had mean quality scores of over 35 and the resulting ASV
                         table retained a median of 15,990 chimera-removed, high-quality reads per sample (range:
                         5808–36,337) (Table 1). Although raw reads were significantly higher in FFPE (p = 0.02,
                         Figure S2A), no significant differences in filtered high-quality reads were found between FF
                         and FFPE (paired Wilcoxon test, p = 0.85, Figure S2A). After examining filtered read counts,
                         rarefaction curves of the ASV table indicated a saturation of diversity at 5000 reads/sample,
                         except for sample 124-FF (Figure S2B).

                         Table 1. Sequencing statistics per sample group included in this study.

                                    Sequencing Data                       FFPE                   FF                 NTC
                                      # Raw reads                        916,957              417,435              67,621
                                    Mean raw reads                       83,359                46,381
                                    # Filtered reads                     492,972              359,237              57,201
                                  Mean filtered reads                    44,815                39,915
                               # Final high-quality reads                181,046              142,325              24,537
                              Mean final high-quality reads               16,458               15,814
                                % Chimeric/Raw reads                       79%                  67%                 64%
                                    # Number ASVs                          389                  493
                         Abbreviations: FF; fresh frozen, FFPE; formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded, NTC; no-template control, ASVs;
                         amplicon sequence variants and #; number.


                               Both FF and FFPE groups were dominated by Bacteria (81.3% in FF vs. 78% in FFPE),
                         followed by Eukaryotes (15.6 % in FF vs. 18% in FFPE) and ASVs without kingdom level
                         assignment (2.9% in FF and 4% in FFPE), whereas Archaea were detected only in FF
                         samples (0.2%) (Figure 1). ASVs matching with eukaryotic sequences were used to infer
                         putative taxonomy, by using blastn vs. NCBI RefSeq databases. The query indicated
                         that 99.4% of eukaryotic sequences matched with human sequences (23% corresponded to
                         proteins broadly expressed in the gut) and other mammalian species (Mus musculus and Pan
                         troglodytes), at lower proportions (0.6%). Therefore, eukaryotic sequences were filtered out
                         from the ASV table. We found that the NTC had approximately 25,000 reads (Figure S2A
                         and Table 1) and the composition was exclusively dominated by bacterial sequences
                         (Figure 1). The presence of high levels of bacterial DNA in PCR no-template controls,
                         mostly matching with general contaminants was also described in previous reports [20].
                         To assess for potential cross-contamination between samples, 339 ASVs associated with
                         the NTC were taxonomically characterized at the genus scale. The microbial community
                         in the NTC was mostly dominated by Rhizobium (56%), Acinetobacter (11%), Lysinibacillus
                         (7%), Delftia (5%) and other taxa, described as general environmental contaminants [37]
                         (Figure S3A). When we compared the two groups, these taxa were significantly more
                         abundant in FFPE samples (p = 2 × 10−5 ), although at low proportions (Figure S3A,B). All
                          ure 1). The presence of high levels of bacterial DNA in PCR no-template controls, mostly
                          matching with general contaminants was also described in previous reports [20]. To assess
                          for potential cross-contamination between samples, 339 ASVs associated with the NTC
                          were taxonomically characterized at the genus scale. The microbial community in the
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421    NTC was mostly dominated by Rhizobium (56%), Acinetobacter (11%), Lysinibacillus6 of (7%),
                                                                                                                 18
                          Delftia (5%) and other taxa, described as general environmental contaminants [37] (Figure
                          S3A). When we compared the two groups, these taxa were significantly more abundant
                          in FFPE samples (p = 2 × 10−5), although at low proportions (Figure S3A,B). All the 339
                         the 339 NTC-associated ASVs were then in silico subtracted from the datasets. Furthermore,
                          NTC-associated ASVs were then in silico subtracted from the datasets. Furthermore, sin-
                         singletons were removed from the ASV table to filter out low-abundant sequences.
                          gletons were removed from the ASV table to filter out low-abundant sequences.




                          Figure1.1. Taxa composition
                         Figure               composition at  thekingdom
                                                           atthe  kingdomlevel.  BarBar
                                                                            level.    plots showing
                                                                                         plots  showingglobal composition
                                                                                                           global compositionat the king-
                                                                                                                                  at the
                          dom
                         kingdom  level. Individual
                                      level.         samples
                                             Individual       areare
                                                         samples  reported in in
                                                                     reported      x-axis
                                                                              thethe      and
                                                                                      x-axis   relative
                                                                                             and         abundance
                                                                                                  relative abundance        percentage)of
                                                                                                                          percentage)
                                                                                                                     (as(as
                         oftaxa
                             taxaininthe
                                      they-axis.
                                          y-axis.Pie
                                                  Piegraphs
                                                      graphsbelow
                                                             beloweach
                                                                    eachpanel
                                                                         panel display
                                                                               display the   relative abundance
                                                                                         the relative abundance of ofidentified
                                                                                                                      identifiedtaxa
                                                                                                                                  taxainin
                          the corresponding group. NA (not available) indicates unassigned ASVs at the kingdom taxonomy
                         the corresponding group. NA (not available) indicates unassigned ASVs at the kingdom taxonomy
                          rank. Abbreviations: FF; fresh frozen, FFPE; formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded PCR-CNT; PCR no-
                         rank. Abbreviations: FF; fresh frozen, FFPE; formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded PCR-CNT; PCR
                          template control and NTC; no-template control.
                         no-template control and NTC; no-template control.
                          3.2.Comparison
                         3.2.  Comparisonofofthe  theMicrobial
                                                      MicrobialDiversity
                                                                 Diversitybetween
                                                                            betweenFF FFand
                                                                                          andFFPE
                                                                                                FFPETissues
                                                                                                        Tissues
                               AAgeneral
                                    generalincrease
                                               increaseininalpha
                                                              alphadiversity
                                                                      diversity(within-samples
                                                                                  (within-samplesdiversity)
                                                                                                         diversity)estimated
                                                                                                                      estimatedby   bythe
                                                                                                                                        the
                          ShannonIndex
                         Shannon       Indexwaswasobserved
                                                      observedininFF FF(median
                                                                         (median==5.5,5.5,IQR
                                                                                            IQR==5.13–5.75)
                                                                                                     5.13–5.75)vs. vs.FFPE
                                                                                                                       FFPE(median
                                                                                                                              (median==
                          5.01IQR
                         5.01   IQR==4.4–4.85),
                                        4.4–4.85),although
                                                     althoughdifferences
                                                                 differenceswere
                                                                               werenotnotstatistically
                                                                                           statisticallysignificant
                                                                                                           significant(Figure
                                                                                                                         (Figure2A).
                                                                                                                                   2A).
                                In  the  beta  diversity   assessment,    principal  coordinate      analysis   (PCoA)
                               In the beta diversity assessment, principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) based on both       based   on  both
                          Bray–Curtis      and  Jaccard   distances   showed    that  the  microbial    community
                         Bray–Curtis and Jaccard distances showed that the microbial community present in FFPE          present   in FFPE
                          tendedto
                         tended     tocluster
                                       cluster separately
                                                 separately from
                                                              from the
                                                                     the communities
                                                                          communitiesin   inFFFFsamples,
                                                                                                   samples,withwiththe
                                                                                                                     thefactor
                                                                                                                          factorPatientID
                                                                                                                                   Patien-
                          showing
                         tID  showing  higher   contribution
                                           higher   contributionto the  variance
                                                                    to the         (PERMANOVA,
                                                                            variance   (PERMANOVA,        Bray–Curtis
                                                                                                               Bray–Curtisp=p=0.002,   r2 =
                                                                                                                                    0.002,
                          0.57
                         r2     and and
                            = 0.57    Jaccard   p= p
                                           Jaccard   0.003, r2 = r2
                                                        = 0.003, 0.55)  (Figure
                                                                    = 0.55)      2B,C).
                                                                             (Figure     Hierarchical
                                                                                       2B,C).              clustering
                                                                                                Hierarchical            based on
                                                                                                                  clustering  based  Bray–
                                                                                                                                        on
                          Curtis   distances
                         Bray–Curtis              displayed
                                          distances            differences
                                                       displayed   differencesin in
                                                                                  the
                                                                                    themicrobial
                                                                                        microbialabundance
                                                                                                      abundance between the      the two
                                                                                                                                       two
                          groups,with
                         groups,     with some
                                            some sample pairspairs clustering
                                                                    clusteringtogether
                                                                                 together(i.e.,
                                                                                             (i.e.,119,
                                                                                                    119,135
                                                                                                          135and
                                                                                                               and 136) (Figure
                                                                                                                     136)  (Figure2D).  Six
                                                                                                                                      2D).
                          out  of  ten   FFPE    samples    clustered   together,
                         Six out of ten FFPE samples clustered together, with       with   the   most    abundant     genera   including
                                                                                                        abundant genera including
                          Romboutsia,Propionibacterium,
                         Romboutsia,      Propionibacterium,Aquipuribacter
                                                                 Aquipuribacterand andParacoccus.
                                                                                        Paracoccus.In   Inaaseparate
                                                                                                              separatecluster,
                                                                                                                         cluster,mostly
                                                                                                                                   mostly
                          composedof
                         composed       of FF
                                            FF samples, bacterial
                                                           bacterial sequences
                                                                       sequenceswerewerepredominantly
                                                                                            predominantlyfrom    fromCollinsella,
                                                                                                                        Collinsella,Faecal-
                                                                                                                                      Fae-
                         calibacterium,Fusobacterium,
                          ibacterium,      Fusobacterium,Roseburia
                                                              Roseburiaand     Escherichia/Shigella. Another cluster
                                                                          and Escherichia/Shigella.                  clusterincluding
                                                                                                                               including
                         samples
                          samplesfromfrombothbothgroups
                                                   groupswaswascharacterized
                                                                 characterizedby   byaaBacteroides-rich
                                                                                        Bacteroides-richmicrobiota
                                                                                                               microbiota(Figure
                                                                                                                            (Figure2D).2D).
                         Hierarchical clustering based on the Jaccard distance showed a clear separation between FF
                         and FFPE samples, with few exceptions (134-FF, 135-FFPE and 136-FFPE) (Figure 2E). The
                         most prevalent bacterial groups in FFPE samples included Paracoccus, Aquipuribacter, Sphin-
                         gomonas, Streptococcus and Bacillus, whereas microbiota profiles in FF samples were mainly
                         distinguished by the presence of Collinsella, Fusobacterium, Roseburia, Escherichia/Shigella,
                         Faecalibacterium, Alistipes and Ruminococcus. Yet, Bacteroides and Propionibacterium appeared
                         to be ubiquitously distributed across both FF and FFPE samples.
                                     Hierarchical clustering based on the Jaccard distance showed a clear separation between
                                     FF and FFPE samples, with few exceptions (134-FF, 135-FFPE and 136-FFPE) (Figure 2E).
                                     The most prevalent bacterial groups in FFPE samples included Paracoccus, Aquipuribacter,
                                     Sphingomonas, Streptococcus and Bacillus, whereas microbiota profiles in FF samples were
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421               mainly distinguished by the presence of Collinsella, Fusobacterium, Roseburia, 7 of       Esche-
                                                                                                                                   18
                                     richia/Shigella, Faecalibacterium, Alistipes and Ruminococcus. Yet, Bacteroides and Propionibac-
                                     terium appeared to be ubiquitously distributed across both FF and FFPE samples.




      Figure 2.
      Figure   2. Alpha-
                  Alpha- and
                          and beta-diversity
                                beta-diversityanalysis
                                               analysisofofFFFFand
                                                                andFFPE
                                                                     FFPEtissue
                                                                            tissuesamples.
                                                                                   samples.(A)   Box
                                                                                               (A)  Boxplots displaying
                                                                                                         plots           Shannon
                                                                                                                displaying Shannon  diversity at
                                                                                                                                      diversity
      the ASV level for each preservation method, with pairs connected by lines (p = 0.16, Wilcoxon test). (B,C) Principal coor-
      at the ASV level for each preservation method, with pairs connected by lines (p = 0.16, Wilcoxon test). (B,C) Principal
      dinate analysis (PCoA) based on Bray–Curtis (B) and Jaccard (C) distances. Each point represents a unique sample. Sample
      coordinate analysis (PCoA) based on Bray–Curtis (B) and Jaccard (C) distances. Each point represents a unique sample.
      pairs and preservation methods are differentiated by symbol shapes and colors, respectively. The proportion of variance
      Sample pairs and
      corresponding         preservation
                        to each  principal methods
                                           component areisdifferentiated
                                                            reported in theby corresponding
                                                                               symbol shapesaxis. andPERMANOVA-adonis
                                                                                                        colors, respectively. The   proportion
                                                                                                                                r-squared   and
      of variance    corresponding    to each  principal  component     is reported   in  the  corresponding     axis. PERMANOVA-adonis
      p-values are shown at the top of each plot. Both (B,C) share the same figure legend. (D,E) Heatmaps showing hierarchical
      r-squared and
      clustering       p-values
                   analysis      are shown
                            of bacterial    at the top of
                                         composition      each plot.
                                                       profiles  basedBoth  (B,C) share the
                                                                       on Bray-Curtis      (D)same   figure legend.
                                                                                               and Jaccard           (D,E) metrics.
                                                                                                             (E) distance  Heatmaps Theshowing
                                                                                                                                         cluster
      hierarchical
      analysis   wasclustering
                      generatedanalysis
                                  using of
                                         ASVbacterial composition
                                               abundances            profileslevel
                                                              at the genus         (30on
                                                                               based      Bray-Curtis
                                                                                        most   abundant  (D)
                                                                                                           genera Jaccard (E)
                                                                                                             and are          distance
                                                                                                                        reported)       metrics.
                                                                                                                                   and Ward’s
      method
      The       (as linkage
           cluster           method).
                    analysis was        Colored
                                   generated     bar ASV
                                              using  beneath   upper each
                                                           abundances        heatmap
                                                                         at the genus level        mostpreservation
                                                                                               (30 the
                                                                                        indicates         abundant genera   are(FF in
                                                                                                                       method         blue and
                                                                                                                                 reported)
      FFPE
      Ward’s inmethod
                yellow).(as
                          Taxa  are reported
                             linkage         in row
                                      method).       labels
                                                 Colored  barand  sampleID
                                                               beneath   upper   each by
                                                                              indicated      column
                                                                                       heatmap         labels.the
                                                                                                  indicates       preservationFF;
                                                                                                               Abbreviations:            frozen
                                                                                                                                   fresh (FF
                                                                                                                                method        in
      and
      blueFFPE;    formalin-fixed
            and FFPE    in yellow).paraffin-embedded.
                                     Taxa are reported in row labels and sampleID indicated by column labels. Abbreviations: FF;
      fresh frozen and FFPE; formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded.

                                     3.3. Taxonomic Profiling and Discriminant Taxa between FF and FFPE Tissue Samples
                                           The taxonomic characterization indicated that one of the most remarkable differences
                                     between FF and FFPE sample pairs emerged from the archaeal content as reported in
                                     Figure 1. Specifically, archaeal sequences were detected exclusively in FF samples, account-
                                     ing for up to 2% of the global composition (Figure S4A). Of these, 40% of archaeal-associated
                                     ASVs were assigned to Crenarchaeota, Euryarchaeota and Woesearchaeota phyla and detected
                                     in 5 out of 10 FF samples with relative abundances lower than 1% (Figure S4B). The bacte-
                                     rial composition was dominated by Bacteroidetes (43.3% in FF vs. 34.7% in FFPE), Firmicutes
                                     (34.1% in FF vs. 28.4% in FFPE), Proteobacteria (13.2% in FF vs. 19.6% in FFPE) and Acti-
                                     nobacteria (6.3% in FF vs. 19.6% in FFPE) in both groups (Figure 3A). Compared with their
                          between FF and FFPE sample pairs emerged from the archaeal content as reported in Fig-
                          ure 1. Specifically, archaeal sequences were detected exclusively in FF samples, account-
                          ing for up to 2% of the global composition (Figure S4A). Of these, 40% of archaeal-associ-
                          ated ASVs were assigned to Crenarchaeota, Euryarchaeota and Woesearchaeota phyla and de-
                          tected in 5 out of 10 FF samples with relative abundances lower than 1% (Figure S4B). The
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                                              8 of 18
                          bacterial composition was dominated by Bacteroidetes (43.3% in FF vs. 34.7% in FFPE), Fir-
                          micutes (34.1% in FF vs. 28.4% in FFPE), Proteobacteria (13.2% in FF vs. 19.6% in FFPE) and
                          Actinobacteria (6.3% in FF vs. 19.6% in FFPE) in both groups (Figure 3A). Compared with
                          their   matched
                         matched FF           FF samples,
                                          samples,   the the      microbiota
                                                           microbiota    of FFPE of FFPE      tissues was
                                                                                     tissues was              significantly
                                                                                                       ignificantly           enriched
                                                                                                                      enriched in    Acti-in
                         nobacteria    (p = (p
                          Actinobacteria        = and
                                            0.002)0.002) and    Proteobacteria
                                                         Proteobacteria   (p = (p
                                                                                0.008),= and
                                                                                         0.008),   and in
                                                                                                depleted depleted    in Fusobacteria
                                                                                                               Fusobacteria   (p        (p =
                                                                                                                                 = 0.036).
                          0.036). Such
                         Such   differencesdifferences
                                                were more  were  more at
                                                              evident   evident     at the
                                                                            the order        order
                                                                                          level,     level, with
                                                                                                  with             Enterobacteriales
                                                                                                         Enterobacteriales              (p =
                                                                                                                             (p = 0.009),
                          0.009),   Coriobacteriales
                         Coriobacteriales              (p = 0.014),
                                            (p = 0.014),            Fusobacteriales
                                                           Fusobacteriales (p = 0.036)(p = and0.036)  and (p =
                                                                                                            Clostridiales
                                                                                                Clostridiales      0.049)(p =   0.049) sig-
                                                                                                                            significantly
                         increased
                          nificantlyin FF,    whereas
                                        increased        Rhodobacterales (p =
                                                    in FF, whereas                          Propionibacteriales (p
                                                                                 0.009), (p = 0.009),
                                                                      Rhodobacterales                                           Bacillales
                                                                                                                     = 0.011), (p =
                                                                                                         Propionibacteriales        0.011),
                         (p =           Sphingomonadales (p
                               0.022),(p = 0.022),
                          Bacillales                            = 0.022) (p
                                                    Sphingomonadales       and  Lactobacillales
                                                                             = 0.022)    and       (p =
                                                                                               Lactobacillales  significantly
                                                                                                        0.032) (p =  0.032) higher       in
                                                                                                                             significantly
                         FFPE    samples
                          higher in     FFPE(Figure
                                               samplesS5).(Figure
                                                            Discriminant     analysis at the
                                                                   S5). Discriminant              genus
                                                                                            analysis      level
                                                                                                      at the    showed
                                                                                                              genus        concordance
                                                                                                                      level showed     con-
                         with   differences
                          cordance      with observed
                                              differencesat the   orderat the
                                                             observed      levelorder
                                                                                  (Figure    3B and
                                                                                         level         Figure
                                                                                                 (Figures             Paracoccus
                                                                                                                S5). S5).
                                                                                                            3B and                 (order
                                                                                                                           Paracoccus   (or-
                         Rhodobacterales),
                          der   Rhodobacterales),Propionibacterium     (order
                                                       Propionibacterium        Propionibacteriales)
                                                                             (order   Propionibacteriales)       Sphingomonas
                                                                                                            and and    Sphingomonas(order
                                                                                                                                        (or-
                         Sphingomonadales)
                          der   Sphingomonadales)  were were
                                                           identified  in FFPE,
                                                                 identified         whereas
                                                                               in FFPE,         Collinsella
                                                                                             whereas         (order (order
                                                                                                        Collinsella  Coriobacteriales),
                                                                                                                              Coriobacte-
                         Dorea,   Lachnoclostridium,     Ruminococcaceae_UCG-002,             Roseburia,
                          riales), Dorea, Lachnoclostridium, Ruminococcaceae_UCG-002, Roseburia, ParvimonasParvimonas    and   Faecalibac-
                                                                                                                                  and Fae-
                         terium   (order   Clostridiales),   Esherichica/Shigella   (order    Enterobacteriales)    and
                          calibacterium (order Clostridiales), Esherichica/Shigella (order Enterobacteriales) and Fuso-   Fusobacterium
                         (order   Fusobacteriales) were
                          bacterium (order                    detected
                                                 Fusobacteriales)    were in FF.  Other in
                                                                             detected       genera   found to
                                                                                               FF. Other        be more
                                                                                                            genera          abundant
                                                                                                                      found to    be morein
                         FF  tissues in
                          abundant     included   Odoribacter
                                           FF tissues   included(order   Bacteroidales),
                                                                   Odoribacter     (order while       Acinetobacter
                                                                                             Bacteroidales),    whileand    Pseudomonas
                                                                                                                        Acinetobacter   and
                         (order   Pseudomonadales)
                          Pseudomonas                      were found in FFPE
                                            (order Pseudomonadales)          were samples
                                                                                     found in(Figure       3B). Taken
                                                                                                   FFPE samples          together,
                                                                                                                     (Figure   3B). these
                                                                                                                                     Taken
                         results   suggest   that the  preservation   method     has    an  impact   on  the  microbiota
                          together, these results suggest that the preservation method has an impact on the micro-          composition
                         ofbiota
                            CRCcomposition
                                    tissues.      of CRC tissues.




                          Figure3.3.Discriminant
                         Figure      Discriminanttaxa
                                                   taxabetween
                                                         betweenFF FFand
                                                                       andFFPE
                                                                             FFPEpreservation
                                                                                    preservationmethods.
                                                                                                  methods.(A) (A)Stacked
                                                                                                                   Stackedbar
                                                                                                                           barchart
                                                                                                                               chart
                          showing bacterial phyla. Significantly different phyla between FF and FFPE are indicated by a white
                         showing bacterial phyla. Significantly different phyla between FF and FFPE are indicated by a white
                          asterisk (p ≤ 0.05, Wilcoxon paired test). Individual samples are reported in the x-axis and relative
                         asterisk (p ≤ 0.05, Wilcoxon paired test). Individual samples are reported in the x-axis and relative
                          abundance (as percentage) of taxa in the y-axis. (B) LEfSe rank plot of microbial differences between
                         abundance
                          FF and FFPE(as tissue
                                         percentage) of taxa
                                                samples,     in the y-axis.
                                                         expressed   as LDA (B)logarithmic
                                                                                 LEfSe rankscore.
                                                                                            plot ofFactorial
                                                                                                    microbial  differences
                                                                                                             pairwise      between
                                                                                                                       Wilcoxon  test
                         FF and FFPE tissue samples, expressed as LDA logarithmic score. Factorial pairwise Wilcoxon
                         test with p ≤ 0.05 and LDA logarithmic score > 3 indicated statistical significance. Abbreviations:
                         FF; fresh frozen, FFPE; formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded, NA, unidentified taxa and NTC, no-
                         template control.

                         3.4. Putative Fusobacterium, Bacteroides and Propionibacterium Species Classification
                              Several multi-cohort studies have documented an enrichment of Fusobacterium, par-
                         ticularly F. nucleatum, in colorectal tumors [38]. In our dataset, sequences matching with
                         Fusobacterium were detected in 6 FF and 2 FFPE samples (2.2% in FF vs. 0.6% in FFPE mean
                         relative abundance, p = 0.036) (Figure S6A). Moreover, Bacteroides and Propionibacterium,
                         both previously linked to the development of human gastric cancers [39], were detected in
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                         9 of 18




                         all tissue samples with few exceptions, although at different proportions (34.3% in FF vs.
                         29.6% in FFPE, p = 0.43 for Bacteroides; 2.5% in FF vs. 8.4% in FFPE global mean, p = 0.0092
                         for Propionibacterium) (Figure S6A). Analysis of published data from paired FF/FFPE non-
                         tumoral gastric tissues [18] showed that Propionibacterium was higher in the FFPE group
                         (21.8% in FF vs. 62.4% in FFPE, p = 0.062) (Figure S6B). As expected, Fusobacterium was
                         present at very low abundance (0.33% in FF vs. 0.08% in FFPE, p = 0.18), whereas sequences
                         from Bacteroides were not detected in this dataset (Figure S6B).
                               We then attempted to assign Fusobacterium, Bacteroides and Propionibacterium putative
                         species by aligning corresponding ASVs to the 16S microbial database using BLASTN (see
                         Methods). All Propionibacterium (n ASVs = 14) and Bacteroides (n ASVs =1) sequences were
                         assigned to a single candidate species identified as Cutibacterium acnes strain JCM 6425
                         (formerly Propionibacterium acnes, 99.10% mean identity) and Bacteroides dorei strain 175
                         (99.57% mean identity), respectively (data not shown).
                               Sequence alignment generated from Fusobacterium-associated ASVs discriminated
                         five putative species. F. nucleatum (99.29% mean identity) was the only species detected in
                         FFPE (0.57% mean relative abundance) and the most abundant in FF group (1.78% mean
                         relative abundance). Other putative species identified in FF tissue samples included F.
                         varium, F. mortiferum, F. simiae and F. periodonticum (0.25%, 0.1%, 0.08% and 0.01% mean
                         relative abundance, respectively), with 99.21% mean identity (Figure S7A). To validate
                         the putative taxonomy assignment, the phylogenetic relationship between Fusobacterium
                         sequences (ASVs) using IQ-TREE to build a maximum-likelihood tree (see Methods) was
                         assessed. Individual 16S rRNA reference genes for Fusobacterium spp, along with that of
                         Fusobacterium-associated ASVs were included to determine inter-, intra- and subspecies
                         relationships. The phylogenetic analysis revealed two main branched clades of Fusobac-
                         terium phylotypes. F. mortiferium (28 ASVs + 16S reference gene) was phylogenetically
                         close to F. varium (11 ASVs + 16S reference gene). Four detected F. nucleatum subspecies
                         (49 ASVs + 16S reference gene) clustered in a different clade and were closely related to F.
                         simiae (8 ASVs) and F. periodonticum (1 ASV + 16S reference gene) (Figure S7B). Considering
                         that such phylogenetic patterns agreed with previous reports [40], it appears reasonable
                         to suggest the validity of putative species classification herein described, also evidencing
                         the predominance of F. nucleatum over other Fusobacterium species in FF samples from
                         our dataset.

                         3.5. Comparison of CRC-Associated Bacteria Characterized by RNA-ISH and 16S rRNA
                         Sequencing
                              RNA-ISH technique was performed on FFPE samples to validate in situ the results
                         obtained by 16S rRNA sequence analysis. Results were expressed in counts. Samples
                         with less than 100 counts of total bacteria (analyzed with the EB16S probe) quantified by
                         image analysis were excluded from the analysis for not passing the quality control for
                         RNA-ISH studies (Supplementary Table S2). To determine potential differences in the
                         community structure profiled from the two methods, we used bacterial absence/presence
                         (Table 2) summarized from quantitative data (Supplementary Table S2) for each sample
                         pair. Bacterial presence was determined with the threshold of ≥100 and ≥10 bacterial
                         counts for RNA-ISH and 16S rRNA sequencing, respectively.
                              Concordance between methods for the detection of tumor-associated bacteria varied
                         according to the bacteria analyzed. RNA-ISH confirmed the presence of tumor-associated
                         Fusobacterium in all cases positive by 16S. Notably, Fusobacterium could be visualized by
                         RNA-ISH also in FFPE samples that were negative by 16S but positive by 16S in FF samples
                         (Figure 4, Table 2). When analyzing the Propionibacterium, RNA-ISH confirmed the presence
                         of tumor-associated Propionibacterium in all FFPE samples as also shown by 16S analysis on
                         the same sample type. There was one sample negative for 16S in FF that was positive in
                         FFPE that could also be confirmed by RNA-ISH (Table 2). Moreover, RNA-ISH allowed
                         the distinction between the tumor-associated Propionibacterium and the contaminant one,
                         defining contaminant as the bacteria that was associated neither to tumor nor to adjacent
                         normal mucosa, generally appearing in the outer margins of the samples (Figure 4). When
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                                                        10 of 18




                                      analyzing the Bacteroides, RNA-ISH detected the presence of tumor-associated bacteria only
                                      in half (three out of six) of the positive FFPE samples by 16s, and three out of seven FF
                                      samples that were positive by 16S. (Figure 4, Table 2).

       Table 2. Presence or absence (+/−) of bacterial genera characterized by RNA-ISH and 16S rRNA sequencing for each of the
       sample pairs tested evaluable for RNA-ISH.

                          Bacteroides                                  Fusobacterium                              Propionibacterium
            RNA-ISH            16S                         RNA-ISH           16S                          RNA-ISH         16S
  ID                                        16S (FF)                                       16S (FF)                                 16S (FF)
             (FFPE)          (FFPE)                         (FFPE)         (FFPE)                          (FFPE)       (FFPE)
  119           −                +              +              +               −              −               +               +                +
  121           −                +              +              −               −              −               +               +                +
  123           +                +              +              +               +              +               +               +                +
  124           −                −              +              +               −              +               +               +                +
  129           +                +              +              +               −              +               +               +                +
                − 13, x
  135 Cancers 2021,              +              +              −               −              −               +               +        11 of 18+
  136           +                +              +              +               −              +               +               +               −
                                     Abbreviations: FF; fresh frozen and FFPE; formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded.




       Figure 4. Representative RNA-ISH images in CRC tumor samples. (A) Representative images of Fusobacterium positive
       samples.  (B) 4.
             Figure  Representative
                         Representativeimages
                                        RNA-ISH of Bacteroides positive
                                                   images in CRC    tumorsamples.
                                                                            samples.(C)
                                                                                     (A)Representative
                                                                                         Representative images      Propionibacterium
                                                                                                         imagesofofFusobacterium        positive
                                                                                                                                  positive
       samples   showing
             samples.   (B) the distinction
                           Representative    between
                                          images   of the   tumor-associated
                                                     Bacteroides positive        Propionibacterium
                                                                          samples. (C) Representative(top images) and
                                                                                                      images of                   positive one
                                                                                                                         the contaminant
                                                                                                                Propionibacterium
             samples
       (bottom         showing the
                images).            distinction
                           Abbreviations:       between the
                                             RNA-ISH;         tumor-associated
                                                         RNA in situ            Propionibacterium
                                                                        hybridization   and CRC;(top   images) and
                                                                                                   colorectal       the contaminant one
                                                                                                              cancer.
             (bottom images). Abbreviations: RNA-ISH; RNA in situ hybridization and CRC; colorectal cancer.

                                          3.6. Quality Assessment of FFPE DNA Based on 16S rRNA Amplicon Profiling
                                              Our results showed substantial variability in CRC-associated microbiota across FF-
                                          FFPE sample pairs (Figure 5A); thus, we attempted to identify a quality control index for
                                    5C). Concordance between FF and FFPE sample pairs was not significantly influenced by
                                    the tumor content (Figure S9). Both compositional and correlation analyses revealed that
                                    the four sample pairs (124, 11, 133 and 121) exhibiting higher dissimilarity also showed
                                    higher compositional variability and abundance of contaminant taxa (Figure 5A,C). Based
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421              on these profiles, sample pairs used in this study were classified as ‘low’ and ‘high’11 of      com-
                                                                                                                                        18
                                    parability (Figure S10A). Next, available samples from few other similar studies (pub-
                                    lished data [10,18]) were classified based on the above-defined criteria (abundance of con-
                                    taminant taxa and dominance of two most abundant orders within sample pair) (Figure
                                          Bacterial
                                    S10B,C)          content was
                                             for cross-study       also analyzed
                                                              comparison.     Aboutin theadjacent
                                                                                           publishednormal
                                                                                                       studymucosa    by RNA-ISH.
                                                                                                             by Debesa-Tur             All
                                                                                                                              et al. char-
                                    bacteria were   found significantly  enriched   in tumor   tissue. Propionibacterium was
                                    acterizing CRC-associated microbiota from FFPE tissue types [10], samples were classified visualized
                                    also in correspondence
                                    according   to dominance of adjacent   non-tumoral
                                                                 criteria (if              mucosa while
                                                                              “high”, abundance            Fusobacterium
                                                                                                      of two             and Bacteroides
                                                                                                              most abundant     orders >
                                    50%) and prevalence of typical contaminants in the global composition (Figure dataset
                                    were  tumor-associated   (Figure   S8A).  A  similar  profile was   observed in a  published   S10C).
                                    of metagenomic     analysis comparing     FFPE   normal   mucosa    and colorectal cancer
                                    Based on the above-described classification, a comparison between samples virtually hav-  tissues  [9],
                                    ing   Propionibacterium
                                    with“high”    and “low”sequences     equallyacross
                                                               comparability       distributed   in both
                                                                                          the three       groups
                                                                                                      studies         Fusobacterium
                                                                                                                 andperformed
                                                                                                               was                    and
                                                                                                                                  (Figure
                                    Bacteroides significantly increased in tumor tissues (Figure S8B).
                                    S11A). Discriminant analysis revealed that “low” comparability samples were enriched in
                                    taxa (at bothAssessment
                                    3.6. Quality   order and of
                                                              genus
                                                                FFPElevels)
                                                                        DNA described
                                                                               Based on 16Sas typical  contaminants
                                                                                              rRNA Amplicon           while being virtu-
                                                                                                               Profiling
                                    ally absent in the other samples (Figure S11B,C). This would hint at a subset of FFPE tis-
                                          Our results showed substantial variability in CRC-associated microbiota across FF-
                                    sues having high levels of contaminant bacteria potentially derived from storage or ma-
                                    FFPE sample pairs (Figure 5A); thus, we attempted to identify a quality control index for
                                    nipulation procedures, in which the microbiota profile would not fully recapitulate that
                                    FFPE tissues used in this study.
                                    of their matched frozen tissues.




                 Correlation between
      Figure 5. Correlation   betweencommunity
                                        communitysimilarity
                                                       similarityand
                                                                  andbacterial
                                                                       bacterialdominance
                                                                                  dominancein in
                                                                                               FFFF
                                                                                                  and FFPE
                                                                                                    and     sample
                                                                                                         FFPE       pairs.
                                                                                                               sample          Comparison
                                                                                                                           (A)(A)
                                                                                                                       pairs.      Compar-
      ison of
      of       bacterial
         bacterial       composition
                   composition         (top
                                  (top 15   15 most
                                          most         abundant
                                                 abundant         orders)
                                                             orders)       between
                                                                     between         paired
                                                                                paired      FF and
                                                                                       FF and   FFPEFFPE
                                                                                                      samples.  (B) (B)
                                                                                                           samples.      Representation
                                                                                                                    Representation        of
                                                                                                                                     of two
      mostmost
      two        abundant
            abundant         bacterial
                         bacterial     orders
                                   orders      in FF
                                           in FF      tissues
                                                  tissues     characterized
                                                           characterized   in in their
                                                                              their    matched
                                                                                    matched      FFPEsamples.
                                                                                               FFPE                                showing
                                                                                                                             plots showing
                                                                                                                     Scatter plots
                                                                                                                 (C)Scatter
                                                                                                       samples.(C)
      spearman’s    correlation between
      spearman’s correlation    betweenBray–Curtis,
                                          Bray–Curtis,Jaccard
                                                          Jaccardand
                                                                   andJensen–Shannon
                                                                        Jensen–Shannondissimilarity
                                                                                          dissimilarity  metrics
                                                                                                       metrics andand bacterial
                                                                                                                    bacterial   dominance
                                                                                                                              dominance   in
      in FFPE samples. Dissimilarity matrices are based on all microbial communities present in paired FF and FFPE CRC tissue
      FFPE samples. Dissimilarity matrices are based on all microbial communities present in paired FF and FFPE CRC tissue
      microbiome (y-axis). In x-axes, bacterial dominance is expressed as the sum of the two most abundant orders in FF measured
      in their matched FFPE samples. Spearman’s correlation coefficient and BH-adjusted p-values are indicated on the top of each
      panel. (A–C) Sample reads were randomly rarefied to the minimum sample depth (5808 sequences). (A,B) Sample pairs are
      ordered based on increasing similarity. Abbreviations: FF; fresh frozen and FFPE; formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded.

                                         To address this, the bacterial dominance in FF samples (here defined as the relative
                                    abundance of the two most abundant orders) was compared with their matched FFPE
                                    sample. Six out of ten sample pairs (129, 134, 119, 123, 135 and 136) were mainly dominated
                                    by Bacteroidales and Clostridiales in both FF and FFPE tissues, using an arbitrary abundance
                                    cutoff of 50% (Figure 5B). Moreover, the bacterial dominance in FFPE tissues (defined as
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                         12 of 18




                         the distribution in FFPE tissues of two most abundant orders identified in their matched
                         FF samples) strongly correlated with similarity within each sample pair measured by
                         using different dissimilarity metrics at the ASV level (Bray–Curtis, r = −0.72 and p = 0.018;
                         Jaccard, r = −0.72 and p = 0.012; Jensen–Shannon, r = −0.74 and p = 0.019) (Figure 5C).
                         Concordance between FF and FFPE sample pairs was not significantly influenced by the
                         tumor content (Figure S9). Both compositional and correlation analyses revealed that the
                         four sample pairs (124, 11, 133 and 121) exhibiting higher dissimilarity also showed higher
                         compositional variability and abundance of contaminant taxa (Figure 5A,C). Based on
                         these profiles, sample pairs used in this study were classified as ‘low’ and ‘high’ compa-
                         rability (Figure S10A). Next, available samples from few other similar studies (published
                         data [10,18]) were classified based on the above-defined criteria (abundance of contaminant
                         taxa and dominance of two most abundant orders within sample pair) (Figure S10B,C) for
                         cross-study comparison. About the published study by Debesa-Tur et al. characterizing
                         CRC-associated microbiota from FFPE tissue types [10], samples were classified according
                         to dominance criteria (if “high”, abundance of two most abundant orders > 50%) and
                         prevalence of typical contaminants in the global composition (Figure S10C). Based on the
                         above-described classification, a comparison between samples virtually having “high” and
                         “low” comparability across the three studies was performed (Figure S11A). Discriminant
                         analysis revealed that “low” comparability samples were enriched in taxa (at both order
                         and genus levels) described as typical contaminants while being virtually absent in the
                         other samples (Figure S11B,C). This would hint at a subset of FFPE tissues having high
                         levels of contaminant bacteria potentially derived from storage or manipulation procedures,
                         in which the microbiota profile would not fully recapitulate that of their matched frozen
                         tissues.

                         4. Discussion
                               Increasing evidence suggests that the analysis of CRC-associated microbiota can reveal
                         crucial aspects of cancer progression and response to treatments. Given the relatively low
                         similarity between stool and mucosal samples and limited availability of fresh material,
                         FFPE tumor biopsies have a great potential for providing access to a large collection
                         of samples. Nonetheless, their use in high-throughput metagenomic studies has been
                         questioned [14]. In the present study, we profiled the microbiota composition of paired
                         FFPE and FF tissues from a small cohort of CRC patients and found variations in the degree
                         of comparability between preservation methods.
                               In general, our microbiome profiles were comparable to other available data, in which
                         Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes and Fusobacteria were reported as the most predominant taxa in
                         CRC samples [41]. Both compositional and diversity analyses revealed distinct microbial
                         communities, suggesting that the microbial composition of FFPE sample types did not
                         completely resemble those of their matched frozen material. One of the most remarkable
                         differences was attributed to the presence of archaeal sequences in FF but not FFPE tissues.
                         It is worth noting that the presence of archaea in the gut microbiome of CRC patients and
                         co-occurring associations with CRC-enriched bacteria, such as Bacteroides spp., have been
                         previously reported [42].
                               Both RNA-ISH and 16S rRNA sequencing were effective at capturing the most preva-
                         lent tumor-associated bacteria assessed in this study. Using a 16S rRNA approach, we
                         were able to detect Fusobacterium, widely proposed as a diagnostic and prognostic CRC
                         biomarker [43], in most FF samples but only two matched FFPE samples from our cohort.
                         Tumor-associated Fusobacterium characterized by 16S rRNA sequencing in FF samples were
                         fully recapitulated by RNA-ISH analysis, with one exception. Conversely, Fusobacterium
                         could be detected by 16S on FFPE only in one out of seven RNA-ISH/16S rRNA evalu-
                         able pairs, suggesting that 16S sequencing might underestimate Fusobacterium abundance
                         in FFPE samples. Using a metagenomics approach, Debesa-Tur et al. were able to find
                         an enrichment of Fusobacterium spp. in FFPE colorectal tumor specimens, albeit direct
                         comparison with matched frozen material was not provided [10]. This discrepancy may
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                           13 of 18




                         be linked to the use of optimized extraction and library preparation protocols aimed at
                         improving the analysis of bacterial DNA from FFPE biotypes [10]. Bacteroides [44] were
                         also characterized in our study cohort by both 16S rRNA sequencing and RNA-ISH. We
                         were able to visualize Bacteroides by RNA-ISH in roughly half of the 16S positive sam-
                         ples. The lower sensitivity shown by RNA-ISH may in part be explained by probe design
                         and/or heterogeneity in the analyzed samples. Importantly, RNA-ISH showed that all
                         Bacteroides were tumor-associated, with no or barely detectable bacteria in the adjacent
                         normal mucosa, confirming the putative oncogenic role of this bacteria. An unexpected
                         finding was the ubiquitous detection of Propionibacterium, with higher abundance in FFPE
                         samples, as similarly reported in non-tumoral gastric FFPE tissues from another study [18].
                         Propionibacterium spp., such as P. acnes, were described as opportunistic pathogens involved
                         in the development of diverse medical conditions, including carcinogenesis [45]. However,
                         propionibacteria were also described as contaminants associated to clinical samples and other
                         sources (i.e., laboratory settings or environment), frequently detectable in high-throughput
                         sequencing data [46]. Results from spatial analysis using RNA-ISH in our study indicated
                         that Propionibacterium could either act as tumor-associated and/or contaminant bacteria. In
                         contrast to Fusobacterium and Bacteroides that were significantly enriched in correspondence
                         with the tumor regions with only sporadic presence in adjacent normal mucosa, Propioni-
                         bacterium were randomly distributed across the sample being visualized in both normal
                         and tumor tissue areas as well as in the outer sample margins.
                               Based on these findings, the RNA-ISH method might be successfully employed in
                         validating and complementing 16S rRNA gene-based microbial profiling, adding valuable
                         spatial information to be considered together with sequencing data for the interpretation of
                         novel potential pathogens or contaminants. Moreover, our results indicate that RNA-ISH
                         may be the preferred method to study selected bacteria in FFPE tissues. This is particularly
                         relevant for Fusobacterium due to the emerging role of this bacteria as a putative biomarker,
                         validating the use of this methodology for the extensive characterization of archival FFPE
                         tumor samples from large patient cohorts with associated clinical and outcome data.
                               Our data also revealed that the microbiota of FF samples was enriched in other bacte-
                         rial taxa frequently associated with CRC, such as Collinsella and Parvimonas [47]. Whereas,
                         typical water- and soil-contaminants, including Paracoccus, Sphingomonas, Pseudomonas
                         and Acinetobacter [48] were increased in FFPE tissues. Although our primary goal was
                         to explore the comparability of CRC-associated microbiota between paired FF and FFPE
                         tissues, this study necessarily addresses technical details regarding contamination issues.
                         Compared with high biomass samples (i.e., stool), contamination is a considerable threat to
                         the accuracy of sequence-based analysis in low biomass samples such as FFPE specimens,
                         blood, or tumor biopsies [48]. Non-sterile conditions during the formalin fixation process
                         may render low biomass samples extremely susceptible to the burden of contaminants,
                         thus obscuring the microbial composition in these sample types [49,50]. Additionally, a
                         high host to bacterial DNA ratio, as found in our samples, potentially derived from the
                         patient, hospital and/or lab personnel can lead to PCR biases, thus reducing amplification
                         efficiency and validity of results [51]. In our study, bacterial taxa documented in the current
                         literature as typical contaminants were identified and then subtracted from the dataset
                         using custom bioinformatic approaches. Nevertheless, the most common strategies for
                         minimizing alterations introduced during FFPE sample processing mainly fall under the
                         remit of wet-lab procedures (i.e., host DNA depletion, microbial enrichment, and DNA
                         repair during the extraction process [50]). Additionally, computational methods such as
                         SourceTracker, and Decontam [52,53] have been developed to identify potential contam-
                         inants in high-throughput metagenomic studies and address their in silico removal to
                         improve data accuracy, given that their sensitivity is highly influenced by the number of
                         control samples.
                               Given the variable impact of FFPE DNA quality in the comparison of our matched-
                         pair cohort, we attempted to implement an internal quality standard to assess the validity
                         of our results. Although we were not able to provide a robust predictive biomarker for
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                             14 of 18




                         FFPE sample quality, our analysis indicated that the predominance of typical contaminants
                         significantly influences the degree of comparability between FF and FFPE samples. Despite
                         the intrinsic limitations and low comparability with FF tissues, the implementation of FFPE
                         tissues in cancer genomics studies may provide new insight into the discovery of novel
                         cancer biomarkers associated with this sample type.
                               Most of the microbiome studies including tumor samples are limited by small sample
                         sizes [54] and this limitation is also inherent in our study. Although the sample size in
                         our study would be acceptable to gain preliminary insights into the feasibility of using
                         FFPE tissues for characterizing the CRC-associated microbiota, larger sample size is recom-
                         mended to overcome potential drawbacks derived from the use of FFPE DNA. According
                         to our results, the preservation method did not directly influence the sequencing yield.
                         Nonetheless, sequencing efforts are highly encouraged to obtain sufficient coverage of the
                         bacterial DNA in clinical samples potentially having high levels of human and contaminant
                         sequences.
                               Besides the presence of contaminants, we were not able to discern additional factors
                         in our study, such as fixation process, time of archiving in formalin, or extraction pro-
                         cess [18,55], which may crucially affect the quality of preserved DNA or tumor content.
                         Several studies indicated the paramount importance of using positive and negative controls
                         to assess for potential biases in low biomass studies [37]. Blank controls of the embedding
                         medium were also recommended to assess for potential artifacts introduced during the
                         formalin fixation process [18,20]. Lastly, intrasample heterogeneity might also have an
                         impact on the differences in microbiota composition and further studies addressing this
                         point are needed. Based on these considerations, before a reliable characterization of
                         tumor microbiota is to extend to FFPE samples, then a clear understanding of all potential
                         confounding factors is required to improve downstream analysis and data interpretation.
                         In this context, Walker et al. recently published a comprehensive description of best prac-
                         tice for sequence analysis of bacteria residing in FF and FFPE tumor tissues, providing a
                         guideline for optimized experimental practices and bioinformatic strategies. Furthermore,
                         a number of approaches have been suggested for increasing the potential value of FFPE
                         samples in metagenomics studies, such as the multiplexed 16S rDNA sequencing protocol
                         based on the amplification and computational combination of short regions along the
                         16S rRNA gene to provide higher resolution of fragmented bacterial DNA [56]. More-
                         over, frameworks implementing binary encoding, super-resolution imaging and machine
                         learning to analyze the spatial ecology of complex microbial communities at single-cell
                         resolution, such as the HiPR-FISH technique [57] may open up new opportunities for
                         investigations of gut-related alterations, including the role of bacterial biofilms in epithelial
                         barrier alteration and initiation of gastrointestinal tumors.
                               Considering multiple challenges in inferring tumor-associated microbiota from FFPE
                         tissue samples, these results might be of some external validity to address potential con-
                         founding factors.

                         5. Conclusions
                              Our data show that sample preservation influences the microbiome composition
                         of CRC biopsies, implying that results from frozen might not be directly extrapolated
                         to FFPE, or vice-versa. However, FFPE tissues have the potential to provide a valuable
                         alternative for novel cancer biomarker discovery if appropriate processing conditions and
                         validation are applied. Despite these limitations, 16S sequencing of CRC biopsies bears the
                         potential to recapitulate RNA-ISH profiling and identify potential pathogens involved in
                         CRC development.

                         Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/
                         10.3390/cancers13215421/s1, Figure S1. PCR amplification profiles of paraffin controls. Figure S2.
                         16S rRNA gene sequencing yield. Figure S3. Comparison of NTC-associated ASVs between FF
                         and FFPE groups. Figure S4. Archae content in FF and FFPE tissue samples. Figure S5. Microbial
                         composition at the order level. Figure S6. Fusobacterium, Bacteroides and Propionibacterium in FF
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                                                    15 of 18




                                    and FFPE sample pairs. Figure S7. Fusobacterium putative species identified in FF and FFPE samples.
                                    Figure S8. Fusobacterium, Bacteroides and Propionibacterium in normal and colorectal cancer FFPE
                                    tissues. Figure S9. Correlation between microbiome concordance and tumor content in FF and
                                    FFPE sample pairs. Figure S10. Comparison of bacterial composition across studies. Figure S11.
                                    Microbiota-associated profiles in FFPE tissue samples with “high” and “low” comparability. Table S1.
                                    Pathologic data of the samples’ patients of the study. Table S2. Summary of the bacterial detection by
                                    RNA-ISH in FFPE samples and 16S on FF and FFPE samples.
                                    Author Contributions: Funding acquisition, R.P. and P.N.; investigation, A.B., G.S., M.N.-J., R.P.
                                    and P.N.; methodology, M.P., L.A., L.S., R.F. and G.S.; formal analysis, A.B.; data curation, A.B. and
                                    F.C.-M.; visualization, A.B. and G.S., supervision, M.N.-J., R.P. and P.N.; writing—original draft
                                    preparation, A.B. and G.S.; writing—review & editing, A.B., G.S., M.N.-J., R.P. and P.N. All authors
                                    have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                    Funding: This project has received funding from “la Caixa” Foundation under the grant agreement
                                    LCF/PR/CE07/5061000, the Fundación Mutua Madrileña [MMADRILEÑA/PREMI/2020CCAA_
                                    NUCIFORO], the Instituto de Salud Carlos III [PI20/00889], and Grifols.
                                    Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of
                                    the Declaration of Helsinki, and approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee of Vall d’Hebron
                                    University Hospital (PR(AG)210/2019).
                                    Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
                                    Data Availability Statement: Raw data from this study are available in the EBI Short Read Archive
                                    under the study accession number PRJEB46353.
                                    Acknowledgments: We thank Rui Ferreira (Figueiredo lab, University of Porto), Gabriela Debesa-Tur
                                    and Vicente Pérez-Brocal (Moya lab, University of Valencia) for kindly sharing additional datasets
                                    from their published studies. Acknowledgements to the Cellex Foundation for providing research
                                    facilities and equipment.
                                    Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

                                    Abbreviations

                                    16S rRNA           16S ribosomal RNA
                                    ASV                Amplicon sequence variant
                                    CRC                Colorectal cancer
                                    DNA                Deoxyribonucleic acid
                                    FF                 Fresh frozen
                                    FFPE               Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
                                                       High Phylogenetic Resolution microbiome mapping by Fluorescence In-Situ
                                    HiPR-FISH
                                                       Hybridization
                                    RNA-ISH            RNA in situ hybridization
                                    NCBI               National Center for Biotechnology Information
                                    NGS                Next-generation sequencing
                                    NTC                Negative template control
                                    PCoA               Principal Coordinates Analysis
                                    PCR                Polymerase chain reaction

References
1.    Lynch, S.V.; Pedersen, O. The human intestinal microbiome in health and disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 2016, 375, 2369–2379. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
2.    Rowland, I.R. The role of the gastrointestinal microbiota in colorectal cancer. Curr. Pharm. Des. 2009, 15, 1524–1527. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
3.    Drewes, J.L.; White, J.R.; Dejea, C.M.; Fathi, P.; Iyadorai, T.; Vadivelu, J.; Roslani, A.C.; Wick, E.C.; Mongodin, E.F.; Loke, M.F.; et al.
      High-resolution bacterial 16S rRNA gene profile meta-analysis and biofilm status reveal common colorectal cancer consortia. NPJ
      Biofilms Microbiomes 2017, 3, 1–12. [CrossRef]
4.    Mima, K.; Nishihara, R.; Qian, Z.R.; Cao, Y.; Sukawa, Y.; Nowak, J.A.; Yang, J.; Dou, R.; Masugi, Y.; Song, M.; et al. Fusobacterium
      nucleatumin colorectal carcinoma tissue and patient prognosis. Gut 2016, 65, 1973–1980. [CrossRef]
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                                               16 of 18




5.    Yu, T.; Guo, F.; Yu, Y.; Sun, T.; Ma, D.; Han, J.; Qian, Y.; Kryczek, I.; Sun, D.; Nagarsheth, N.; et al. Fusobacterium nucleatum
      promotes chemoresistance to colorectal cancer by modulating autophagy. Cell 2017, 170, 548–563.e16. [CrossRef]
6.    Tahara, T.; Yamamoto, E.; Suzuki, H.; Maruyama, R.; Chung, W.; Garriga, J.; Jelinek, J.; Yamano, H.-O.; Sugai, T.; An, B.; et al.
      Fusobacterium in colonic flora and molecular features of colorectal carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2014, 74, 1311–1318. [CrossRef]
7.    Garrett, W.S. Cancer and the microbiota. Science 2015, 348, 80–86. [CrossRef]
8.    Sun, S.; Zhu, X.; Huang, X.; Murff, H.J.; Ness, R.M.; Seidner, D.L.; Sorgen, A.A.; Blakley, I.C.; Yu, C.; Dai, Q.; et al. On the
      robustness of inference of association with the gut microbiota in stool, rectal swab and mucosal tissue samples. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11,
      1–12. [CrossRef]
9.    Huffnagle, G.B.; Dickson, R.P.; Lukacs, N.W. The respiratory tract microbiome and lung inflammation: A two-way street. Mucosal
      Immunol. 2017, 10, 299–306. [CrossRef]
10.   Debesa-Tur, G.; Pérez-Brocal, V.; Ruiz-Ruiz, S.; Castillejo, A.; Latorre, A.; Soto, J.L.; Moya, A. Metagenomic analysis of formalin-
      fixed paraffin-embedded tumor and normal mucosa reveals differences in the microbiome of colorectal cancer patients. Sci. Rep.
      2021, 11, 1–15. [CrossRef]
11.   Racsa, L.D.; DeLeon-Carnes, M.; Hiskey, M.; Guarner, J. Identification of bacterial pathogens from formalin-fixed, paraffin-
      embedded tissues by using 16S sequencing: Retrospective correlation of results to clinicians’ responses. Hum. Pathol. 2017, 59,
      132–138. [CrossRef]
12.   Hart, J.D.; Street, T.; Wrightson, J.M.; Moore, D.P.; Scott, A.G.; Crook, D.W.; Turner, G.D. 16S rRNA sequencing in molecular
      microbiological diagnosis of bacterial infections in the autopsy setting. Pathology 2014, 46, S113. [CrossRef]
13.   Betge, J.; Kerr, G.; Miersch, T.; Leible, S.; Erdmann, G.; Galata, C.L.; Zhan, T.; Gaiser, T.; Post, S.; Ebert, M.P.; et al. Amplicon
      sequencing of colorectal cancer: Variant calling in frozen and formalin-fixed samples. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0127146. [CrossRef]
14.   Robbe, P.; Popitsch, N.; Knight, S.J.L.; Antoniou, P.; Becq, J.; He, M.; Kanapin, A.; Samsonova, A.; Vavoulis, D.V.; Ross, M.T.;
      et al. Clinical whole-genome sequencing from routine formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens: Pilot study for the 100,000
      genomes project. Genet. Med. 2018, 20, 1196–1205. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.   Do, H.; Dobrovic, A. Sequence artifacts in DNA from formalin-fixed tissues: Causes and strategies for minimization. Clin. Chem.
      2015, 61, 64–71. [CrossRef]
16.   Stewart, C.J.; Fatemizadeh, R.; Parsons, P.; Lamb, C.A.; Shady, D.A.; Petrosino, J.F.; Hair, A.B. Using formalin fixed paraffin
      embedded tissue to characterize the preterm gut microbiota in necrotising enterocolitis and spontaneous isolated perforation
      using marginal and diseased tissue. BMC Microbiol. 2019, 19, 1–10. [CrossRef]
17.   Wagle, N.; Berger, M.F.; Davis, M.J.; Blumenstiel, B.; DeFelice, M.; Pochanard, P.; Ducar, M.; van Hummelen, P.; MacConaill, L.E.;
      Hahn, W.C.; et al. High-throughput detection of actionable genomic alterations in clinical tumor samples by targeted, massively
      parallel sequencing. Cancer Discov. 2011, 2, 82–93. [CrossRef]
18.   Pinto-Ribeiro, I.; Ferreira, R.M.; Pereira-Marques, J.; Pinto, V.; Macedo, G.; Carneiro, F.; Figueiredo, C. Evaluation of the use of
      formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded archive gastric tissues for microbiota characterization using next-generation sequencing.
      Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 1096. [CrossRef]
19.   Emery, D.C.; Shoemark, D.; Batstone, T.E.; Waterfall, C.M.; Coghill, J.A.; Cerajewska, T.L.; Davies, M.; West, N.X.; Allen-Birt, S.
      16S rRNA next generation sequencing analysis shows bacteria in Alzheimer’s post-mortem brain. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2017, 9,
      195. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.   Nejman, D.; Livyatan, I.; Fuks, G.; Gavert, N.; Zwang, Y.; Geller, L.T.; Rotter-Maskowitz, A.; Weiser, R.; Mallel, G.; Gigi, E.; et al.
      The human tumor microbiome is composed of tumor type–specific intracellular bacteria. Science 2020, 368, 973–980. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
21.   Andrews, S.; Krueger, F.; Seconds-Pichon, A.; Biggins, F.; Wingett, S. FastQC. A Quality Control Tool for High Throughput
      Se-Quence Data. Babraham Bioinformatics. Available online: https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/
      (accessed on 5 October 2020).
22.   R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing (R Version 3.5.2); R Foundation for Statistical Computing:
      Vienna, Austria, 2018; Available online: https://www.R-project.org/ (accessed on 16 September 2021).
23.   Callahan, B.J.; McMurdie, P.J.; Rosen, M.J.; Han, A.W.; Johnson, A.J.A.; Holmes, S.P. DADA2: High-resolution sample inference
      from Illumina amplicon data. Nat. Methods 2016, 13, 581–583. [CrossRef]
24.   Wang, Q.; Garrity, G.M.; Tiedje, J.M.; Cole, J.R. Naive Bayesian classifier for rapid assignment of rRNA sequences into the new
      bacterial taxonomy. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2007, 73, 5261–5267. [CrossRef]
25.   McDonald, D.; Price, M.N.; Goodrich, J.; Nawrocki, E.P.; DeSantis, T.Z.; Probst, A.; Andersen, G.L.; Knight, R.; Hugenholtz, P. An
      improved Greengenes taxonomy with explicit ranks for ecological and evolutionary analyses of bacteria and archaea. ISME J.
      2012, 6, 610–618. [CrossRef]
26.   McMurdie, P.J.; Holmes, S. Phyloseq: An R package for reproducible interactive analysis and graphics of microbiome census data.
      PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e61217. [CrossRef]
27.   Oksanen, J.; Blanchet, F.G.; Friendly, M.; Kindt, R.; Legendre, P.; McGlinn, D.; Minchin, P.R.; O’Hara, R.B.; Simpson, G.L.; Solymos,
      P.; et al. Vegan: Community Ecology Package. R Package Version 2.5-2. 2019. Available online: https://cran.r-project.org/web/
      packages/vegan/index.html (accessed on 16 September 2021).
28.   Dray, S.; Dufour, A.-B. The ade4 package: Implementing the duality diagram for ecologists. J. Stat. Softw. 2007, 22, 1–20.
      [CrossRef]
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                                                   17 of 18




29.   Bodenhofer, U.; Kothmeier, A.; Hochreiter, S. APCluster: An R package for affinity propagation clustering. Bioinformatics 2011, 27,
      2463–2464. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.   Segata, N.; Izard, J.; Waldron, L.; Gevers, D.; Miropolsky, L.; Garrett, W.S.; Huttenhower, C. Metagenomic biomarker discovery
      and explanation. Genome Biol. 2011, 12, R60. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.   O’Leary, N.A.; Wright, M.W.; Brister, J.R.; Ciufo, S.; Haddad, D.; McVeigh, R.; Rajput, B.; Robbertse, B.; Smith-White, B.; Ako-Adjei,
      D.; et al. Reference sequence (RefSeq) database at NCBI: Current status, taxonomic expansion, and functional annotation. Nucleic
      Acids Res. 2016, 44, D733–D745. [CrossRef]
32.   Camacho, C.; Coulouris, G.; Avagyan, V.; Ma, N.; Papadopoulos, J.S.; Bealer, K.; Madden, T.L. BLAST+: Architecture and
      applications. BMC Bioinform. 2009, 10, 421. [CrossRef]
33.   Edgar, R.C. MUSCLE: Multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004, 32,
      1792–1797. [CrossRef]
34.   Capella-Gutierrez, S.; Silla-Martinez, J.M.; Gabaldon, T. TrimAl: A tool for automated alignment trimming in large-scale
      phylogenetic analyses. Bioinformatics 2009, 25, 1972–1973. [CrossRef]
35.   Nguyen, L.-T.; Schmidt, H.A.; von Haeseler, A.; Minh, B.Q. IQ-TREE: A fast and effective stochastic algorithm for estimating
      maximum-likelihood phylogenies. Mol. Biol. Evol. 2015, 32, 268–274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.   Wattam, A.R.; Abraham, D.; Dalay, O.; Disz, T.L.; Driscoll, T.; Gabbard, J.L.; Gillespie, J.J.; Gough, R.; Hix, D.; Kenyon, R.;
      et al. PATRIC, the bacterial bioinformatics database and analysis resource. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014, 42, D581–D591. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
37.   Eisenhofer, R.; Minich, J.J.; Marotz, C.; Cooper, A.; Knight, R.; Weyrich, L.S. Contamination in low microbial biomass microbiome
      studies: Issues and recommendations. Trends Microbiol. 2019, 27, 105–117. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.   Bullman, S.; Pedamallu, C.S.; Sicinska, E.; Clancy, T.E.; Zhang, X.; Cai, D.; Neuberg, D.; Huang, K.; Guevara, F.; Nelson, T.; et al.
      Analysis of Fusobacterium persistence and antibiotic response in colorectal cancer. Science 2017, 358, 1443–1448. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
39.   Liu, X.; Shao, L.; Liu, X.; Ji, F.; Mei, Y.; Cheng, Y.; Liu, F.; Yan, C.; Li, L.; Ling, Z. Alterations of gastric mucosal microbiota across
      different stomach microhabitats in a cohort of 276 patients with gastric cancer. EBioMedicine 2019, 40, 336–348. [CrossRef]
40.   Citron, D.M. Update on the taxonomy and clinical aspects of the genus Fusobacterium. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2002, 35, S22–S27.
      [CrossRef]
41.   Xu, K.; Jiang, B. Analysis of mucosa-associated microbiota in colorectal cancer. Med. Sci. Monit. 2017, 23, 4422–4430. [CrossRef]
42.   Coker, O.O.; Wu, W.K.K.; Wong, S.H.; Sung, J.J.; Yu, J. Altered gut archaea composition and interaction with bacteria are associated
      with colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 2020, 159, 1459–1470. [CrossRef]
43.   Gethings-Behncke, C.; Coleman, H.G.; Jordao, H.W.T.; Longley, D.B.; Crawford, N.; Murray, L.J.; Kunzmann, A.T. Fusobac-terium
      nucleatum in the colorectum and its association with cancer risk and survival: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Cancer
      Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 2020, 29, 539–548. [CrossRef]
44.   Feng, Q.; Liang, S.; Jia, H.; Stadlmayr, A.; Tang, L.; Lan, Z.; Zhang, D.; Xia, H.; Xu, X.; Jie, Z.; et al. Gut microbiome development
      along the colorectal adenoma–carcinoma sequence. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 6528. [CrossRef]
45.   Davidsson, S.; Mölling, P.; Rider, J.; Unemo, M.; Karlsson, M.G.; Carlsson, J.; Andersson, S.-O.; Elgh, F.; Söderquist, B.; Andrén, O.
      Frequency and typing of Propionibacterium acnes in prostate tissue obtained from men with and without prostate cancer. Infect.
      Agents Cancer 2016, 11, 1–10. [CrossRef]
46.   Mollerup, S.; Friis-Nielsen, J.; Vinner, L.; Hansen, T.A.; Richter, S.R.; Fridholm, H.; Herrera, J.A.R.; Lund, O.; Brunak, S.;
      Izarzugaza, J.M.G.; et al. Propionibacterium acnes: Disease-causing agent or common contaminant? Detection in diverse patient
      samples by next-generation sequencing. J. Clin. Microbiol. 2016, 54, 980–987. [CrossRef]
47.   Saus, E.; Iraola-Guzmán, S.; Willis, J.R.; Brunet-Vega, A.; Gabaldón, T. Microbiome and colorectal cancer: Roles in carcinogenesis
      and clinical potential. Mol. Asp. Med. 2019, 69, 93–106. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.   Salter, S.J.; Cox, M.J.; Turek, E.M.; Calus, S.T.; Cookson, W.O.; Moffatt, M.F.; Turner, P.; Parkhill, J.; Loman, N.J.; Walker, A.W.
      Reagent and laboratory contamination can critically impact sequence-based microbiome analyses. BMC Biol. 2014, 12, 87.
      [CrossRef]
49.   Hykin, S.M.; Bi, K.; McGuire, J.A. Fixing formalin: A method to recover genomic-scale DNA sequence data from formalin-fixed
      museum specimens using high-throughput sequencing. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0141579. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.   Walker, S.P.; Tangney, M.; Claesson, M. Sequence-based characterization of intratumoral bacteria—A guide to best practice. Front.
      Oncol. 2020, 10, 179. [CrossRef]
51.   Jervis-Bardy, J.; Leong, L.E.X.; Marri, S.; Smith, R.J.; Choo, J.M.; Smith-Vaughan, H.C.; Nosworthy, E.; Morris, P.S.; O’Leary, S.;
      Rogers, G.B.; et al. Deriving accurate microbiota profiles from human samples with low bacterial content through post-sequencing
      processing of Illumina MiSeq data. Microbiome 2015, 3, 19. [CrossRef]
52.   Knights, D.; Kuczynski, J.; Charlson, E.S.; Zaneveld, J.; Mozer, M.C.; Collman, R.G.; Bushman, F.D.; Knight, R.T.; Kelley, S.T.
      Bayesian community-wide culture-independent microbial source tracking. Nat. Methods 2011, 8, 761–763. [CrossRef]
53.   Davis, N.M.; Proctor, D.M.; Holmes, S.P.; Relman, D.A.; Callahan, B.J. Simple statistical identification and removal of contaminant
      sequences in marker-gene and metagenomics data. Microbiome 2018, 6, 226. [CrossRef]
Cancers 2021, 13, 5421                                                                                                             18 of 18




54.   Wirth, U.; Garzetti, D.; Jochum, L.M.; Spriewald, S.; Kühn, F.; Ilmer, M.; Lee, S.M.L.; Niess, H.; Bazhin, A.V.; Andrassy, J.; et al.
      Microbiome analysis from paired mucosal and fecal samples of a colorectal cancer biobank. Cancers 2020, 12, 3702. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
55.   Spencer, D.H.; Sehn, J.K.; Abel, H.J.; Watson, M.A.; Pfeifer, J.D.; Duncavage, E.J. Comparison of clinical targeted next-generation
      sequence data from formalin-fixed and fresh-frozen tissue specimens. J. Mol. Diagn. 2013, 15, 623–633. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.   Fuks, G.; Elgart, M.; Amir, A.; Zeisel, A.; Turnbaugh, P.J.; Soen, Y.; Shental, N. Combining 16S rRNA gene variable regions enables
      high-resolution microbial community profiling. Microbiome 2018, 6, 1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.   Shi, H.; Shi, Q.; Grodner, B.; Lenz, J.S.; Zipfel, W.; Brito, I.L.; de Vlaminck, I. Highly multiplexed spatial mapping of microbial
      communities. Nature 2020, 588, 676–681. [CrossRef]
