              biomedicines
Article
SSCS: A Stage Supervised Subtyping System for
Colorectal Cancer
Lan Zhao 1, *         and Yi Pan 2

                                          1   Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA 94305, USA
                                          2   Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen University Town,
                                              Shenzhen 518055, China; yi.pan@siat.ac.cn
                                          *   Correspondence: lanzhao20140101@gmail.com or lanzhao5@stanford.edu


                                          Abstract: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is heterogeneous and deadly, and the exact cause of the disease is
                                          unknown. Recent progress indicated that CRC is not a single disease, but a group of diseases with
                                          significant heterogeneity. Three previous CRC subtyping systems: microsatellite instability (MSI),
                                          consensus molecular subtypes (CMS), and tumor-node-metastases (TNM) stage were evaluated
                                          for their molecular and clinical implications. Results suggested that the MSI and CMS systems are
                                          prognostic and predictive mostly in early-stage CRC. As the stage remains an influential factor for
                                          CRC subtype analysis, we developed a new subtyping system named stage supervised CRC subtypes
                                          (SSCS), in order to better stratify CRC biologically and clinically. Our subtyping system can be used
                                          to classify CRC patients into five subtypes (SSCS1-5). SSCS1 was found to have the highest frequency
                                          of MSI-H cases compared to the remaining four subtypes. SSCS2 had the most favorable prognosis,
                                          whereas the worst prognosis was seen in SSCS4. SSCS3 had cell cycle and metabolism-related gene
                                          sets upregulation, and SSCS5 subtype was enriched with amplicon-associated gene sets. Moreover,
                                          tumor-infiltrating fibroblast was found to be predictive for poor disease-free survival (DFS) only
                                within the SSCS4 subtype. Conventional dendritic cells (cDC), on the contrary, were associated with
                                   favorable DFS in the SSCS3 subtype. Our study provides a new subtyping system SSCS, which can
Citation: Zhao, L.; Pan, Y. SSCS: A       be used for better stratify CRC patients compared to current standards. Further exploration of the
Stage Supervised Subtyping System         subtype-specific cell types has the potential to be novel therapies for CRC.
for Colorectal Cancer. Biomedicines
2021, 9, 1815. https://doi.org/           Keywords: colorectal cancer; tumor heterogeneity; stage supervised CRC subtypes (SSCS); tumor-
10.3390/biomedicines9121815               infiltrating cell

Academic Editor: Massimo Moro


Received: 13 October 2021
                                          1. Introduction
Accepted: 30 November 2021
Published: 2 December 2021
                                               Colorectal cancer (CRC) starts in the colon or rectum, and is the third most prevalent
                                          cancer in the world. CRC is more common in developed countries than in developing
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                          countries. Genetic and environmental risk factors such as family history, aging, smoking,
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                          obesity, physical inactivity, and chronic inflammation are strongly linked to CRC.
published maps and institutional affil-        CRC is heterogeneous in terms of distinct clinical outcomes and diverse molecular
iations.                                  features. Thus, clinical stage and molecular status have been extensively used to classify
                                          CRC into homogeneous groups. Tumor-node-metastases (TNM) staging system as recom-
                                          mended by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) is to determine the extent
                                          of the cancer or how far it has spread. CRC can be classified into four major stages (I-IV)
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                                          based on the TNM system. The clinical outcomes of CRC vary greatly by the stage at
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          the time of diagnosis [1,2]. Those diagnosed with early stages of CRC (stages I and II)
This article is an open access article
                                          generally have higher survival rate than advanced stages cases (stages III and IV) [1]. Two
distributed under the terms and           distinct genome instabilities, namely chromosomal and microsatellite instability (CIN and
conditions of the Creative Commons        MSI) are hallmarks of CRC, representing useful systems to stratify patients for treatment.
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     Aneuploidy can lead to CIN, and about 70% CRC cases have CIN, where chromosomes
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          are incorrectly duplicated or deleted [3]. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH), mitotic recom-
4.0/).                                    bination and gene conversion contribute to the CIN phenotype. However, markers and



Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815. https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines9121815                              https://www.mdpi.com/journal/biomedicines
Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815                                                                                          2 of 16




                             criteria for CIN have not been clearly confirmed. In addition, LOH analyses are prone to
                             many inaccurate results [4]. Defect in DNA mismatch repair (dMMR) can lead to MSI [5].
                             Microsatellites, also called simple sequence repeats (SSRs), which are widely distributed
                             throughout the genomes of many organisms. The majority of microsatellites are located
                             in the non-coding regions and are without biological effect [6]. Others are presented in
                             coding or regulatory regions, which can affect phenotypes and predisposition to diseases.
                             MSI is typically detected by PCR-based amplification of specific microsatellite markers [7].
                             A small portion (~15%) of CRC arises from the MSI [5]. High frequency microsatellite insta-
                             bility (MSI-H) CRCs are heavily infiltrated by immune cells, making them ideal candidates
                             for immunotherapy, and are associated with favorable outcomes [8,9]. Although MSI status
                             can guide immunotherapy treatment decisions, its prognostic and predictive relevance is
                             often limited [10,11].
                                   With the advance of high-throughput molecular technologies, a growing number of
                             large-scale genome-wide profiling studies were conducted to investigate the CRC hetero-
                             geneity in greater depth than before [12–17]. The most recently well recognized subtyping
                             system for CRC developed by the Colorectal Cancer Subtyping Consortium (CRCSC)
                             suggested that there are four consensus (CMS1-CMS4) and one non-consensus (NOLBL)
                             subtypes of CRC [18]. CMS1 (14%) is microsatellite unstable, hypermutated, and have
                             strong immune activation; CMS2 (37%) has marked WNT and MYC signaling activation;
                             CMS3 (13%) tumors displayed prominent metabolic dysregulation; CMS4 (23%) malignan-
                             cies have noticeable transforming growth factor–β activation, and stromal invasion; and the
                             remaining 13% are NOLBL samples without assigned consensus labels CMS subtypes have
                             been shown to provide molecularly and clinically distinct clusters compared to CIN and
                             MSI groups. However, as the majority of the patients included in the original identification
                             of CMS subtypes derived from early stage CRC, making it difficult to provide prognostic
                             values for advanced cases [19–21].
                                   Thus, in our study, we first systematically evaluated the clinical relevance and molec-
                             ular features of previous CRC subtyping systems; followed by developing a new CRC
                             subtyping system SSCS, taking the tumor stage as an independent factor; and lastly, char-
                             acterization of the identified subtypes.

                             2. Methods
                             2.1. CRC Cohort Datasets
                                  The datasets used in the study include: TCGA colorectal dataset (TCGA in short),
                             CPTAC colon cancer dataset (CPTAC in short), and four CRC Gene Expression Omnibus mi-
                             croarray datasets (GSE14333, GSE39582, GSE33113, and GSE37892; GEO in short) (Table 1).
                                  TCGA mRNA expression profile was downloaded from the TCGAcrcmRNA pack-
                             age (version 1.14.0), which contains 450 primary CRC level 3 (processed) data gener-
                             ated by HiSeq and GenomeAnalyzer platforms. Processed CPATAC mRNA expres-
                             sion data, which contains 105 primary tumors, was downloaded from LinkedOmics
                             (http://linkedomics.org/cptac-colon/; Accessed on 15 August 2019). Patient clinical meta-
                             data such as age, gender, MSI status, CMS labels, and patient survival information were
                             downloaded from cBioPortal (http://www.cbioportal.org; Accessed on 15 August 2019),
                             LinkedOmics and/or associated publications [18,22]. Processed and merged GEO mRNA
                             expression and clinical data of 914 CRC (only non-MSI-H patients were included) were
                             obtained from the mcsurvdata package (version 1.11.0) [23]. The details on processing of
                             raw Affymetrix microarray samples, correcting potential technical effects (such as sample’s
                             center of origin, batch, age, gender, TNM stage and MSI status), and merging the four
                             microarray datasets were described in the associated vignettes [23].
Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815                                                                                                                3 of 16




                                Table 1. Patient’s distributions from three previous CRC subtyping systems.

     System                  Label             Character      Classification      Disadvantage          TCGA         CPTAC         GEO
                                                 Better
                             Early                                                                    247 (56.7%)   54 (51.4%)   485 (53.1%)
                                               prognosis
      Stage                                  ECM and cell      Supervised       No molecular basis
                         Advanced            proliferation                                            189 (43.3%)   51 (48.6%)   429 (46.9%)
                                             pathways up
                                               Immune
                             MSI-H                                                                    70 (16.0%)    24 (22.8%)      0 (0)
                                             pathways up
                                                                                High heterogeneity
       MSI                                    Significant      Supervised      within the non-MSI-H
                                                                                                                                     914
                        Non-MSI-H            proportion of                             group          366 (84.0%)   81 (77.2%)
                                                                                                                                  (100.0%)
                                               patients
                             CMS1               MSI-H                                                 59 (13.5%)    14 (13.3%)    44 (4.8%)
                                              Canonical
                             CMS2               cancer                                                150 (34.4%)   33 (31.4%)   369 (40.4%)
       CMS                                   pathways up      Unsupervised      Has an unassigned
                                                                                      group
                             CMS3              Metabolic                                              50 (11.5%)    16 (15.3%)   105 (11.5%)
                             CMS4                EMT                                                  104 (23.9%)   21 (20.0%)   212 (23.2%)
                             NOLBL            Unassigned                                              73 (16.7%)    21 (20.0%)   184 (20.1%)
                                             More MSI-H
                        Early_MSI-H                                                                   53 (12.1%)    14 (13.3%)        -
                                              patients
                                               Oxidation                         Non-distinction
                     Early_non-MSI-H                                                                  194 (44.5%)   40 (38.1%)        -
   Stage + MSI                                pathway up       Supervised       between early- and
                                                                                advanced-cases in
                     Advanced_MSI-H         Fewer patients                                             17 (3.9%)    10 (9.5%)         -
                                                                                  MSI-H patients
                      Advanced_non-              Worst
                                                                                                      172 (39.5%)   41 (39.1%)        -
                         MSI-H                 prognosis
                         CMS1-4 (in
                                              Distinctive                                             214 (59.0%)   47 (56.0%)   405 (55.5%)
                         early-stage)                                            CMS with poor
   Stage + CMS                                                 Supervised        performances in
                        CMS1-4 (in               Non-
                                                                                  advanced case       149 (41.0%)   37 (44.0%)   325 (44.5%)
                      advanced-stage)         distinctive
                             SSCS1              MSI-H                                                 129 (29.6%)   29 (27.6%)   257 (28.1%)
                                             ECM pathway
                             SSCS2            down; better                                            118 (27.1%)   25 (23.8%)   228 (25.0%)
                                               prognosis
                                               Cell cycle
                                             pathway up;
                             SSCS3                            Supervised +       No tumor grade       79 (18.1%)    20 (19.1%)   183 (20.0%)
       SSCS                                       cDC
                                              infiltration    unsupervised        information

                                               Fibroblast
                                              infiltration;
                             SSCS4                                                                    45 (10.3%)     7 (6.7%)     79 (8.6%)
                                                 worst
                                               prognosis
                                               Amplicon
                             SSCS5                                                                    65 (14.9%)    24 (22.8%)   167 (18.3%)
                                              pathway up



                                        2.2. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
                                             Before GSEA, limma package (version 3.48.3) [24] was used for differential expression
                                        analysis between one patient group versus the remaining groups in the transcriptome data.
                                        The resulting fold changes were used as the inputs for GSEA.
                                             MsigDB annotated gene set collections (version 7.2 C2 and C5) with the number of
                                        genes ranging from 10 to 500 were selected for GSEA analysis implemented in the piano
                                        package (version 2.10.0) [25]. The p-values were estimated by GSEA with 1000 permutations
                                        and adjusted by calculating the false discovery rates (FDR). The other parameters were set
                                        as default. Top significantly dysregulated gene sets (FDR adjusted p-value < 0.05) ranked by
                                        enrichment scores were chosen for each patient group, respectively, and used for heatmap
                                        visualization. Specifically, a data matrix was generated with rows defined by the selected
Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815                                                                                          4 of 16




                             enriched/depleted gene sets, and columns by −log10 (adjusted p-value) for each patient
                             group. Hierarchical clustering was then used to cluster the gene sets into groups. Finally,
                             a heatmap was plotted using the package pheatmap (version 1.0.12) [26] to visualize the
                             gene sets patterns among patient groups.

                             2.3. Survival and Cox PH Regression Analysis
                                   Kaplan–Meier method and log-rank test were used to estimate and compare disease
                             free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) among patient groups. Kaplan–Meier survival
                             analysis with pairwise comparisons between patient groups were also performed by using
                             the survminer R package (version 0.3.0) [27]. FDR corrected p-values of less than 0.05 were
                             considered statistically significant.
                                   Multivariate Cox PH regression model was used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs)
                             with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for DFS and OS among patient groups. Covariates in
                             the model included age at diagnosis, gender, CIN status (high and low; when available),
                             and tumor site (left and right). CRC originating in the descending colon, sigmoid colon,
                             rectum, splenic flexure, or rectosigmoid junction were considered left-sided cancers; and
                             CRC originating in the ascending colon, cecum, hepatic flexure, or transverse colon were
                             categorized as right-sided tumors [28]. Ggforest function from the survminer package
                             (version 0.3.0) [27] was used to construct forest plots, which showed HRs and log-rank
                             p-value for DFS and OS among patient groups.

                             2.4. Unsupervised Clustering and Random Forest Classifiers
                                  TCGA early and advanced CRC cases were employed for unsupervised classification
                             by cluster analysis, respectively. DFS-associated genes were pre-selected by univariate
                             Cox PH regression analysis, with Wald test p-values no more than 0.05. Highly variable
                             genes with MAD scores greater than 0.5 were then chosen for consensus clustering using
                             the ConsensusClusterPlus package (version 4.1.0) [29]. Consensus clustering consisted of
                             1000 iterations of PAM clustering for each rank k (from 2 to 8), with 0.9 subsampling ratio,
                             and agglomerative average linkage and Spearman correlation was conducted to identify
                             the attributes of each consensus cluster. Gap statistics were calculated over a range of
                             clusters k (from 2 to 8) to determine the optimal cluster number.
                                  The top 50 most important features were selected to construct random forest classifiers
                             for CRC early- and advanced-stage cases in the TCGA cohort, respectively. The classifiers
                             were built with 1000 trees using the randomForest package (version 4.6-14) [30] in R. The
                             two classifiers were then employed to assign patients in the CPTAC and GEO cohorts into
                             corresponding subtypes.

                             2.5. Statistical Analyses
                                   Statistical analyses were conducted by the software R, version 3.6.3. The enrichment
                             scores of infiltrated-immune and stroma cells for each sample was estimated using xCell
                             (xcell.ucsf.edu; Accessed September-2019) [31]. Cox PH analysis was performed for each
                             cell type to identify independent predictors of DFS and OS, respectively. The statistically
                             significant cell types in the univariate Cox analysis (Wald test p-value less than 0.05) were
                             selected for further investigation. Pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum test was performed to eval-
                             uate the differences of continuous variables (such as age, ImmuneScore, and StromaScore)
                             among patient groups. Chi-squared test was used to investigate the associations of CRC
                             subtypes with gender, MSI, and CMS labels. FDR adjusted p-value of less than 0.05 was
                             considered statistically significant for all tests.

                             3. Results
                             3.1. Evaluations of Three Previous CRC Subtyping Systems
                                 Three CRC subtyping systems (TNM stage, CMS and MSI status) were investigated in
                             terms of their biological implications and clinical relevance. CRC can be grouped into four
                             major stages (I-IV) based on the TNM system. Stage II and stage III CRC make up most
Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815                                                                                         5 of 16




                             of all cases in the TCGA, CPTAC, and GEO datasets (Figure S1). As the tumor progresses
                             from the curable non-invasive stage (I-II, early) to the metastatic stage (III-IV, advanced)
                             with a less favorable prognosis, we consider the tumor stage as a binary variable (early and
                             advanced) in the analysis. Based on mRNA expression profiles, CRC was classified into
                             four consensus subtypes (CMS 1-4) with distinguishing molecular and clinical features and
                             one non-consensus subtype (NOLBL) [18]. According to MSI status, about 15% of CRC
                             were MSI-H, where the microsatellite markers were unstable, in contrast to the remaining
                             85% non-MSI-H cases.
                                   A total of 436 CRC patients from the TCGA dataset have clinical stage information,
                             and among them there were 247 early- and 189 advanced-stage cases, respectively (Table 1).
                             CPTAC dataset contains 54 (early) and 51 (advanced) colon cancer patients. A total of
                             914 CRC patients from four independent GEO datasets were combined into one dataset,
                             namely GEO. Of them, 485 were from early stages, and 429 were from advanced stages
                             (Table 1). Gene-level fold changes between advanced- and early-stage cases for these
                             three datasets’ transcription data were used as the inputs for Gene set enrichment analysis
                             (GSEA), respectively. A total of 92 most highly dysregulated common pathways among
                             the three datasets (FDR adjusted p-value < 0.001; Table S1) were selected for heatmap
                             visualization. Consistent results were observed among the three cohorts such as gene sets
                             were regulated towards the same direction (both up- and down-regulation), and more
                             gene sets were down-regulated than up-regulated in advanced cases (65 vs. 27) (Figure 1a).
                             Down-regulated gene sets include multiple mitochondrial- and metabolism-related signing
                             pathways, however, extracellular matrix (ECM) and cell proliferation-associated gene sets
                             were up-regulated in advanced-stage CRC (Figure 1a). Taken together, this may imply that
                             as tumor progression proceeds, CRC epithelial cells decreased their metabolism and, on
                             the contrary, showed rapid proliferation and metastasis.
                                   CMS and MSI status labels were obtained from the associated data sources [18,22,23].
                             The associations between CMS labels and patients’ molecular features were well described
                             in [18]. There were 70 (16.0%) and 24 (22.8%) MSI-H patients in the TCGA and CPTAC
                             datasets, respectively (Table 1). No MSI-H patients were present in the combined GEO
                             dataset, thus was excluded for the GSEA analysis regarding the MSI status. A total of 537
                             common gene sets were significantly dysregulated between MSI-H and non-MSI-H patients
                             in the TCGA and CPTAC datasets (FDR adjusted p-value < 0.001; Table S2). More than 99%
                             of these gene sets were up-regulated in the MSI-H patients (Table S2 and Figure 1b), these
                             include numerous innate and adaptive immune pathways, which agree well with previous
                             studies [8,9].
                                   We next used the Cox proportional hazard (PH) regression model to evaluate the
                             effects of the three subtyping systems on patients’ disease-free survival (DFS) and overall
                             survival (OS), respectively. Confounder factors such as age, gender, tumor site (left and
                             right), and CIN status (H: high and L: low) were also evaluated when available. Age
                             hazard ratio (HR) values were all close to 1, indicating that age did not affect survival
                             (Figures 1c–e and S2). Gender, tumor site, MSI status, and CIN (when available) all showed
                             no significant effects (log-rank p-value > 0.05) on either DFS or OS (Figures 1c–e and S2).
                             Advanced-stage was a significant poor prognostic factor for DFS (log-rank p-value < 0.05;
                             HR >1), and this was also true for the CPTAC cohort (Figure 1d), where relatively shorter
                             follow up time (<15 months) and fewer patients (~100) were available compared to the other
                             two cohorts (Figure 1c,e). Advanced-stage was also a poor prognostic factor for OS in the
                             TCGA cohort (Figure S2). CMS labels were not evaluated in the CPTAC dataset, as too short
                             survival time to do sufficient estimation (Figure 1d). CMS1 was a poor prognostic factor for
                             DFS in the TCGA dataset, and the HR was 2.52 (95% confidence interval: 1.02–6.2), whereas
                             CMS4 predicts poor DFS in the GEO dataset with HR as 1.58 (1.08–2.3) (Figure 1c,e). CMS
                             labels showed inconsistent effects on survival (specifically DFS), implying that further
                             investigations are necessary.
                                      gene sets were down-regulated than up-regulated in advanced cases (65 vs. 27) (Figure
                                      1a). Down-regulated gene sets include multiple mitochondrial- and metabolism-related
                                      signing pathways, however, extracellular matrix (ECM) and cell proliferation-associated
                                      gene sets were up-regulated in advanced-stage CRC (Figure 1a). Taken together, this may
Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815                                                                                                6 of 16
                                      imply that as tumor progression proceeds, CRC epithelial cells decreased their metabo-
                                      lism and, on the contrary, showed rapid proliferation and metastasis.




      Figure 1.
      Figure   1. Molecular
                    Molecularandandclinical
                                     clinicalrelevance
                                               relevanceof   threeprevious
                                                          ofthree   previousCRCCRCsubtyping
                                                                                      subtypingsystems.
                                                                                                  systems.(a).
                                                                                                            (a).AAp-value
                                                                                                                    p-valueheatmap
                                                                                                                             heatmaprepresenting
                                                                                                                                        representing
      dysregulated      gene   sets  between    advanced-    and   early-stage   of  CRC   (early-stage  was   used   as
      dysregulated gene sets between advanced- and early-stage of CRC (early-stage was used as control). (b). A p-value  control).  (b). A p-value
                                                                                                                                            heatmap
      heatmap representing dysregulated gene sets between MSI-H and non-MSI-H CRC (non-MSI-H group was used as con-
      representing dysregulated gene sets between MSI-H and non-MSI-H CRC (non-MSI-H group was used as control). In the
      trol). In the heatmaps, columns correspond to diﬀerent cohorts, and rows to gene sets. Values in the heatmaps were −log10
      heatmaps, columns correspond to different cohorts, and rows to gene sets. Values in the heatmaps were −log10 (FDR
      (FDR adjusted p-value) transformed. Red color indicates up-regulated gene sets, and green means down-regulated gene
      sets in thep-value)
      adjusted       control transformed.
                              groups. GeneRed   setscolor
                                                     wereindicates
                                                           grouped up-regulated
                                                                      into different gene    sets, and
                                                                                        functional      green means
                                                                                                    categories,         down-regulated
                                                                                                                  with representative      gene sets
                                                                                                                                         functional
      in the  control   groups.    Gene   sets were   grouped   into different   functional  categories,  with   representative
      names shown on the right hand of the heatmaps, respectively. Forest plots of Cox PH regression models illustrated           functional  names
                                                                                                                                                the
      shown
      HRs,     on CIs
             95%    the and
                         right hand
                             log-rank of the heatmaps,
                                        p-values          respectively.
                                                   for different         Forest
                                                                  subtyping       plots of
                                                                               systems     Cox PH
                                                                                         (stage,     regression
                                                                                                 MSI, CMS,        models
                                                                                                              etc.)       illustrated the
                                                                                                                    and confounder         HRs,
                                                                                                                                      factors    95%
                                                                                                                                              (age,
      gender,
      CIs  and etc.)   for DFS
                 log-rank        in thefor
                            p-values    TCGA     (c), CPTAC
                                           different  subtyping(d), and
                                                                  systemsGEO(stage, cohorts.
                                                                                (e) MSI,     Log-rank
                                                                                           CMS,          p-value
                                                                                                 etc.) and        significance
                                                                                                            confounder    factors  (age,were
                                                                                                                                levels       given
                                                                                                                                         gender, etc.)
      by stars:   * <0.05, and  ** <0.01.
      for DFS in the TCGA (c), CPTAC (d), and GEO (e) cohorts. Log-rank p-value significance levels were given by stars: * <0.05,
      and ** <0.01.
                                            CMS and MSI status labels were obtained from the associated data sources [18,22,23].
                                      The   associations between
                                       3.2. TNM Stage Remains    an CMS   labelsFactor
                                                                    Influential   and for
                                                                                       patients’ molecular
                                                                                          CRC Subtype       features were well de-
                                                                                                       Analysis
                                      scribed in [18]. There were 70 (16.0%) and 24 (22.8%) MSI-H patients in the TCGA and
                                             We then evaluated the combination effects of the three previous CRC subtyping
                                      CPTAC datasets, respectively (Table 1). No MSI-H patients were present in the combined
                                       systems on clinical significance and biological implications. There will be four different sce-
                                       nario options to consider: Stage + MSI, Stage + CMS, MSI + CMS, and Stage + MSI + CMS.
                                       The last scenario was not considered due to lack of data and complexity in the subsequent
                                       analysis. As the MSI classification results were more skewed (15% MSI-H vs. 85% non-MSI-
                                       H) compared to the Stage (~51% early vs. 49% advanced) and MSI systems (14% CMS1
                                       vs. 37% CMS2 vs. 13% CMS3 vs. 23% CMS4); and the combination of MSI + CMS systems
                                       will produce 2 × 4 = 8 clusters, which will further decrease its statistical significance, the
                                       scenario of MSI + CMS was also not considered in the study.
                                             For the Stage + MSI scenario (stratifying the patients both by Stage and MSI systems),
                                       patients were separated into four groups: Early_MSI-H, Early_non-MSI-H, Advanced_MSI-
                                       H, and Advanced_non-MSI-H (Table 1). Groups were compared to each other in the
                                       TCGA and CPTAC cohorts. MSI-H patients were more likely to be in early-stage than
                                       advanced-stage in both TCGA (53 in early vs. 17 in advanced) and CPTAC (14 vs. 10)
                                       datasets (Table 1). In the TCGA cohort, where the patient numbers were sufficient to do
                                       pairwise comparisons of survival curves between groups, indicated that the Advanced_non-
                                       MSI-H patients have poorer DFS and OS compared to Early_non-MSI-H patients (FDR
                                       adjusted p < 0.05) (Figures 2a,b and S3). All the other paired differences were not significant
                                       (Figures 2b and S3). Fold changes between one group and the others were employed for
Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815                                                                                                                          7 of 16




                                    GSEA analysis. A total of 94 most highly dysregulated common pathways between TCGA
                                    and CPTAC datasets (FDR adjusted p-value < 0.001; Table S3) were selected for heatmap
                                    visualization. We found multiple immune-related pathways were up-regulated in the
                                    four MSI-H patient groups (TCGA_Early MSI-H, TCGA_Advanced-MSI-H, CPTAC_Early
                                    MSI-H, and CPTAC_Advanced-MSI-H) (Figure 2c). For non-MSI-H groups, several signal
                                    transduction-related gene sets were enriched in the advanced cases, and few oxidation-
                                    associated pathways were highly enriched in early cases (Figure 2c). In sum, we saw
                                    significant clinical and molecular differences between early and advanced cases in7 of
 Biomedicines 2021, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                   non-
                                                                                                                             16
                                    MSI-H patients under this scenario. However, for MSI-H patients, we did not see significant
                                    differences between early and advanced cases.




       Figure2.2.Stage_MSI
      Figure      Stage_MSIand andStage_CMS
                                    Stage_CMSmolecular
                                                  molecularandandclinical
                                                                   clinicalimplications.
                                                                             implications. (a).
                                                                                             (a). Kaplan–Meier
                                                                                                  Kaplan–Meier survival
                                                                                                                     survival curve comparing DFS
                                                                                                                              curve comparing    DFS
      ofofthe
           thefour
               fourgroups
                    groups(Early_MSI-H,
                             (Early_MSI-H,Early_non-MSI-H,
                                               Early_non-MSI-H, Advanced_MSI-H,
                                                                     Advanced_MSI-H, and Advanced_non-MSI-H) in the               the TCGA
                                                                                                                                      TCGA cohort.
                                                                                                                                             cohort.
      The    indicatedp-value
       Theindicated     p-valuewaswascalculated
                                       calculatedwith
                                                    withthe
                                                         thelog-rank
                                                              log-ranktest.
                                                                         test.(b).
                                                                               (b). Summary
                                                                                    Summary tabletable of
                                                                                                        of the
                                                                                                           the pairwise
                                                                                                                 pairwise comparisons
                                                                                                                           comparisons of survival
       curvesbetween
      curves    betweenthethefour
                               four groups.
                                  groups.     Survival
                                            Survival    difference
                                                      difference     was
                                                                   was     tested
                                                                       tested       using
                                                                                using  the the  log-rank
                                                                                           log-rank    test,test,   FDRFDR
                                                                                                             withwith        adjusted
                                                                                                                         adjusted      p-values
                                                                                                                                  p-values       less
                                                                                                                                           less than
       thanwere
      0.05    0.05 were  considered
                  considered          statistically
                               statistically        significant
                                             significant  and and     displayed
                                                                displayed   in redincolor.      A (c).
                                                                                           color.
                                                                                      red (c).          A p-value
                                                                                                   p-value    heatmapheatmap   representing
                                                                                                                         representing       dysreg-
                                                                                                                                       dysregulated
       ulated gene sets between early_MSI-H, early_non-MSI-H, advanced_MSI-H, and advanced_non-MSI-H groups. (d). A p-
      gene sets between early_MSI-H, early_non-MSI-H, advanced_MSI-H, and advanced_non-MSI-H groups. (d). A p-value
       value heatmap representing dysregulated gene sets between CMS 1-4 (in early stage) and CMS 1-4 (in advanced-stage)
      heatmap representing dysregulated gene sets between CMS 1-4 (in early stage) and CMS 1-4 (in advanced-stage) groups. In
       groups. In the heatmaps, columns correspond to different groups, and rows to gene sets. Values in the heatmaps were
      the  heatmaps,
       −log10          columnsp-value)
                (FDR adjusted     correspond    to different
                                           transformed.    Redgroups,  and rowsup-regulated
                                                                color indicates     to gene sets.gene
                                                                                                    Valuessets,   the green
                                                                                                              inand   heatmaps
                                                                                                                            meanswere  −log10 (FDR
                                                                                                                                   down-regulated
      adjusted   p-value) transformed.    Red  color indicates   up-regulated    gene  sets, and  green   means     down-regulated
       gene sets in the corresponding groups. Gene sets were grouped into different functional categories, with representative       gene sets in the
      corresponding
       functional       groups.
                    names   shown Gene  setsright
                                    on the   werehand
                                                    grouped    into
                                                          of the    different functional
                                                                  heatmaps    accompanied by categories,   with
                                                                                                   a colored       representative
                                                                                                                line,             functional
                                                                                                                      respectively (such     names
                                                                                                                                         as maroon
       for  immune-related,
      shown on the    right handorange  forheatmaps
                                   of the   EMT-related,    and blue by
                                                      accompanied      fora colored
                                                                           metabolism-related       gene sets).
                                                                                      line, respectively     (such as maroon for immune-related,
      orange for EMT-related, and blue for metabolism-related gene sets).
                                             363 (83.2%) out of the 436 patients in TCGA dataset have available CMS labels (ex-
                                       cluding    (83.2%)
                                            363 those       out of
                                                         with       the 436
                                                               NOLBL)        patients
                                                                           were       in for
                                                                                 selectedTCGA  thedataset    CMSavailable
                                                                                                   Stage +have     scenarioCMS    labels (exclud-
                                                                                                                             investigation.  Sim-
                                      ing  those
                                       ilarly, 84 with   NOLBL)
                                                   (80.0%)   and 730  were selected
                                                                       (79.9%)       for the
                                                                                patients  in Stage
                                                                                             CPTAC     CMSGEO
                                                                                                    + and     scenario  investigation.
                                                                                                                   datasets were        Similarly,
                                                                                                                                   chosen  under
                                      84  (80.0%)
                                       this scenario.and 730   (79.9%)
                                                         Thus, a          patients
                                                                    total of eight in CPTAC
                                                                                   groups        and GEO
                                                                                            generated        datasets
                                                                                                          for each     were chosen
                                                                                                                    dataset:           under
                                                                                                                              CMS1-4 (in      this
                                                                                                                                           early-
                                      scenario.
                                       stage       Thus,
                                               cases)  anda total
                                                             CMS1-4 of (in
                                                                       eight groups   generated
                                                                            advanced-stage         for each
                                                                                               cases)         dataset:
                                                                                                       (Table 1).         changes(in
                                                                                                                    FoldCMS1-4        early-stage
                                                                                                                                    between   one
                                      cases)   and   CMS1-4     (in  advanced-stage    cases)   (Table 1).  Fold  changes   between
                                       group versus the others in dataset were employed for the GSEA analysis. To better com-          one group
                                      versus
                                       pare the theoverall
                                                    othersgene
                                                             in a dataset  were employed
                                                                  sets patterns,              for the
                                                                                  89 most highly      GSEA analysis.
                                                                                                    dysregulated          To better
                                                                                                                     common          compare
                                                                                                                               pathways        the
                                                                                                                                           across
                                      overall    gene  sets patterns,   89 most  highly   dysregulated    common      pathways  across
                                       the three datasets (FDR adjusted p-value < 0.001; Table S4) were selected for heatmap vis-       the three
                                      datasets
                                       ualization.(FDR     enrichedp-value
                                                      Theadjusted             < 0.001;
                                                                       gene sets  withinTable
                                                                                           eachS4) were
                                                                                                 CMS       selected
                                                                                                        clusters     for heatmap
                                                                                                                  agree  well withvisualization.
                                                                                                                                    previous re-
                                       port [18], such as immune-related pathways enriched in CMS1; a large collection of ca-
                                       nonical cancer-associated pathways up-regulated in CMS2 and CMS1; metabolic path-
                                       ways in CMS3; and EMT-related pathways enriched in CMS4 (Figure 2d). However, CMS
                                       labels showed inconsistent effects on DFS as shown before, that is CMS1 was a poor prog-
                                       nostic factor in the TCGA dataset, whereas CMS4 predicts poor DFS in the GEO dataset
Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815                                                                                            8 of 16




                             The enriched gene sets within each CMS clusters agree well with previous report [18],
                             such as immune-related pathways enriched in CMS1; a large collection of canonical cancer-
                             associated pathways up-regulated in CMS2 and CMS1; metabolic pathways in CMS3;
                             and EMT-related pathways enriched in CMS4 (Figure 2d). However, CMS labels showed
                             inconsistent effects on DFS as shown before, that is CMS1 was a poor prognostic factor in
                             the TCGA dataset, whereas CMS4 predicts poor DFS in the GEO dataset (Figure 1c,e). The
                             situation was even worse for OS, where no significant differences were observed among the
                             CMS labels (Figure S2). Note that we used the NOLBL (unlabeled samples) as the reference
                             group, while Guinney et al. [18] chose the CMS2 as the reference for the multivariate Cox
                             analysis. As the DFS seems to be a better clinical endpoint here, we only consider the
                             DFS under this scenario. Although not reaching statistically significant differences when
                             performing the pairwise comparisons of survival curves in the TCGA early and advanced
                             cases, respectively, CMS1 was more likely to be a poor prognostic factor for DFS in the
                             early patients than in advanced patients (Figure S3). More importantly, from the GEO
                             dataset, pairwise comparisons of survival curves between CMS subtypes, indicated that
                             CMS4 predicts poor DFS in the early cases (CMS4 vs. CMS2, CMS4 vs. CMS 3; BH adjusted
                             p < 0.05), but not in the advanced cases (Figure S3).
                                  Taken together, we evaluated the clinical significance and biological implications of
                             the Stage + MSI and Stage + CMS scenarios, and found that these two scenarios work well
                             only for a subset of the patients, that is, Stage + MSI for non-MSI-H cases and Stage + CMS
                             for early patients. Altogether, the TNM stage remains an influential factor for CRC subtype
                             analysis. This motivates us to develop a new system to better stratify CRC in terms of
                             prognostic and oncologic values, taking the TNM stage as an independent factor.

                             3.3. Identification of Five Stage Supervised CRC Subtypes
                                  In our subtyping system, namely stage supervised CRC subtypes (SSCS), we began by
                             employing a supervised binary splitting of CRC patients into two large groups (early and
                             advanced); followed by applying an unsupervised clustering of these two groups, sepa-
                             rately; early and advanced classifiers were then built to assign patients into corresponding
                             subtypes. TCGA data was used as the training set, CPTAC and GEO were considered for
                             the two validation datasets (Table 1).
                                  A total of 247 early and 189 advanced cases can be found from the TCGA cohort as
                             mentioned above (Table 1). First, 1850 genes were selected with Wald test p-value no more
                             than 0.05 under univariate Cox PH model analysis in the early CRC cases. Then, 1111 genes
                             with MAD > 0.05 were subsequently chosen for consensus clustering. The number of genes
                             selected for advanced cases were 1079 for pre-selection, and 533 for final unsupervised
                             learning, respectively (Table S5). The consensus matrices resulting from the consensus
                             PAM clustering were displayed as heatmaps for each rank k (from 2 to 6) that contains
                             the cluster memberships (Figure 3b–f,h–l). Gap statistics were calculated to determine
                             the optimal cluster numbers, and a peak was found at k = 2 for early cases, and k = 3 for
                             advanced cases (Figure 3a,g). Thus, a total of 5 subtypes (SSCS1-2 for early cases, and
                             SSCS3-5 for advanced cases) were determined in the TCGA cohort. The distribution of our
                             subtyping system (SSCS) in the TCGA cohort was SSCS1 29.6%, SSCS2 27.1%, SSCS3 18.1%,
                             SSCS4 10.3%, and SSCS4 14.9% (Table 1).
                                  In order to classify CRC patients, we built two random forest classifiers (one for early
                             cases and the other for advanced cases) based on the top 50 genes selected according to
                             the feature importance ranking scores in the TCGA early and advanced cases, respectively
                             (Table S5). Classifiers’ misclassification rates in the training dataset (TCGA) were all zeros.
                             54 and 485 early cases as well as 51 and 429 advanced cases can be found from the CPTAC
                             and GEO cohorts, respectively. The classifiers were then employed to classify the patients
                             from the CPTAC and GEO cohorts into corresponding subtypes: SSCS1-5 (Table 1). SSCS1
                             was the largest subtype, accounting for approximately 27.6–29.6% of all cases in each
                             cohort, followed by SSCS2 (~25%). The smallest subtype was SSCS4, with the percentage
                             of patients less than 10.5% in the three cohorts, respectively (Table 1).
Biomedicines  2021,9,9,1815
 Biomedicines2021,      x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                              9 of 16




     Figure 3. Identification of five subtypes for CRC. The Gap statistics distribution plots with corresponding rank k (from 2 to
       Figure 3. Identification of five subtypes for CRC. The Gap statistics distribution plots with corresponding rank k (from 2
              in early-stage
     8)toin8)the             (a), and
                 the early-stage       advanced-stage
                                  (a), and             casescases
                                           advanced-stage    (g). The  consensus
                                                                  (g). The       matrices
                                                                           consensus       resulting
                                                                                      matrices  resulting the consensus
                                                                                                     fromfrom             PAMPAM
                                                                                                               the consensus   clustering
                                                                                                                                    clus-
       tering were displayed as heatmaps for each rank k (from 2 to 6) that contain the cluster memberships for early-stageand
     were     displayed  as heatmaps    for each rank k (from  2 to 6) that contain the cluster memberships    for early-stage (b–f), (b–
     advanced-stage      cases (h–l).
       f), and advanced-stage      cases (h–l).

                                   3.4. In    order to
                                        Molecular         classify
                                                       Features      CRCFive
                                                                  of the     patients,
                                                                                 Subtypeswe built two random forest classifiers (one for early
                                    casesFold
                                            andchanges
                                                  the otherbetween
                                                                for advanced        cases)
                                                                            a subtype versus based the
                                                                                                     on the    top 50 genes
                                                                                                          remaining       subtypesselected
                                                                                                                                        in a according
                                                                                                                                              cohort were    to
                                    the feature    importance       ranking     scores   in the TCGA      early   and   advanced
                                   employed for GSEA analysis, respectively. A total of 103 most highly dysregulated gene            cases,   respectively
                                    (Table
                                   sets      S5). Classifiers’
                                         selected     from the misclassification
                                                                   TCGA cohort (FDR       ratesadjusted
                                                                                                 in the training
                                                                                                             p-value  dataset
                                                                                                                        < 0.05; (TCGA)
                                                                                                                                   Table S6)were  all zeros.
                                                                                                                                                were     used
                                    54 and
                                   for       485 early cases
                                       heatmap                    as well
                                                     visualization.      In asthe51 and   429 gene
                                                                                   heatmap,    advancedsets cases
                                                                                                              with thecan be
                                                                                                                           absolute    valuesthe
                                                                                                                               found from           CPTAC
                                                                                                                                                 of −   log10
                                    and   GEO p-value)
                                   (adjusted     cohorts, greater
                                                              respectively.
                                                                        than 1.3The(adjusted
                                                                                      classifiersp-value
                                                                                                   were <  then   employed
                                                                                                               0.05)   were to      classify the
                                                                                                                              considered           patients
                                                                                                                                              significantly
                                    from   the  CPTAC       and   GEO    cohorts     into  corresponding       subtypes:
                                   altered. Gene sets were basically regulated towards the same direction (both up-          SSCS1-5      (Table  1). SSCS1
                                                                                                                                                          and
                                    was   the  largest    subtype,     accounting      for  approximately
                                   down-regulation) among the three cohorts (TCGA, CPTAC, and GEO), although some27.6–29.6%      of all  cases  in each    co-
                                    hort,  followed     by   SSCS2     (~25%).    The   smallest   subtype     was
                                   were not statistically significant in the CPTAC cohort (Figure 4a). SSCS1 and SSCS4SSCS4,    with   the   percentage      of
                                    patients   less  than    10.5%    in the   three   cohorts,  respectively
                                   subtypes were enriched with ECM-related gene sets; SSCS2 and SSCS3 subtypes have (Table   1).
                                   cell cycle- and metabolism-related gene sets upregulation; and SSCS5 subtype enriched
                                    3.4. Molecular
                                   with   ampliconFeatures
                                                        associated of the  Fivesets
                                                                        gene     Subtypes
                                                                                      (Figure 4a and Table S6). Moreover, subtype-specific
                                   enriched/depleted
                                          Fold changes between a subtypefound
                                                                patterns     can   be   versusfrom       the gene subtypes
                                                                                                 the remaining         sets heatmap.
                                                                                                                                   in cohort For were
                                                                                                                                                  example,em-
                                   immune-related
                                    ployed    for GSEAgene        sets were
                                                            analysis,            up-regulated
                                                                         respectively.      A totalinof 103
                                                                                                       SSCS1, mostandhighly
                                                                                                                        ECM related        gene sets
                                                                                                                                dysregulated      geneweresets
                                   down-regulated
                                    selected    from the  in SSCS2
                                                              TCGA (Figure
                                                                        cohort 4a (FDRand Table
                                                                                           adjustedS6).p-value
                                                                                                          Through      functional
                                                                                                                   < 0.05;           characterization
                                                                                                                             Table S6) were        used for  of
                                   theatmap
                                        SSCS subtypes         illustrates
                                                 visualization.      In thethe    underlying
                                                                              heatmap,           mechanisms
                                                                                            gene sets    with theand      pathophysiology
                                                                                                                      absolute    values of of −log10 CRC.(ad-
                                    justedWe next
                                             p-value)investigated
                                                         greater than  the1.3
                                                                            relationships     among <
                                                                                (adjusted p-value       SSCS
                                                                                                           0.05)labels
                                                                                                                  werewith     patients’significantly
                                                                                                                         considered         characteristics,al-
                                   and   theGene
                                    tered.    results     uggested
                                                    sets were           no significant
                                                                  basically                associations
                                                                               regulated towards            between
                                                                                                        the same        SSCS with
                                                                                                                      direction    (both up-    andage
                                                                                                                                        patients’         and
                                                                                                                                                      down-
                                   gender    (dataamong
                                    regulation)      not shown).       Patients’
                                                               the three    cohorts subtyping     results byand
                                                                                       (TCGA, CPTAC,             using   CMS
                                                                                                                     GEO),       and MSIsome
                                                                                                                              although       systems
                                                                                                                                                  werewere not
                                   also  compared        to  the  SSCS     labels.   From    the  TCGA      cohort,
                                    statistically significant in the CPTAC cohort (Figure 4a). SSCS1 and SSCS4 subtypes85%    of  the  patients    with    the
                                                                                                                                                         were
                                   SSCS4
                                    enrichedlabels
                                                 withwere    CMS4 patients,
                                                        ECM-related                and the
                                                                           gene sets;         remaining
                                                                                         SSCS2 and     SSCS3 15% were
                                                                                                                 subtypes   from
                                                                                                                              have   cell in
                                                                                                                                   CMS2;        contrast
                                                                                                                                            cycle- and me-   to
                                   the SSCS5,     where 62%
                                    tabolism-related       geneof     the patients
                                                                   sets  upregulation; wereandwith the
                                                                                                   SSCS5  CMS2     labels
                                                                                                             subtype     enriched     withSimilar
                                                                                                                           (Figure 4b).      amplicon trends
                                                                                                                                                           as-
                                   can  be seen
                                    sociated    genefrom
                                                       setsthe   CPTAC
                                                             (Figure         andTable
                                                                        4a and     GEO S6).cohorts,   such as SSCS4
                                                                                               Moreover,                   patients corresponding
                                                                                                              subtype-specific       enriched/depleted       to
                                   CMS4,
                                    patterns andcanthe
                                                     belarge     proportion
                                                         found from       the of
                                                                               genethesetspatients
                                                                                            heatmap. fromForSSCS2
                                                                                                              example, and SSCS5      have CMS2
                                                                                                                            immune-related        gene labels
                                                                                                                                                          sets
                                   (Figure    4c,d), although
                                    were up-regulated                the patient’s
                                                               in SSCS1,      and ECM   proportions
                                                                                            related gene  have
                                                                                                             setsminor
                                                                                                                    were changes        compared
                                                                                                                           down-regulated              to the
                                                                                                                                                  in SSCS2
   Biomedicines
Biomedicines    2021,
             2021, 9, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                      1815                                                                                                                      10 of 16




                                      (Figure 4a and Table S6). Through functional characterization of the SSCS subtypes illus-
                                     TCGA cohort (Figure 4b). The frequency of MSI-H cases was highest in SSCS1 (64.2% in
                                      trates the underlying mechanisms and pathophysiology of CRC.
                                     TCGA, and 47.6% in CPTAC) compared to the remaining four subtypes (Figure 4e,f).




        Figure
     Figure  4. 4. SSCS
                SSCS      subtypes
                       subtypes     molecular
                                  molecular       featuresand
                                               features    andcomparisons
                                                                  comparisonswithwithother
                                                                                       othersubtypes.     (a).AAp-value
                                                                                              subtypes.(a).                         representing
                                                                                                                          heatmap representing
                                                                                                                 p-value heatmap
        dysregulated    gene sets between   the   five SSCS   subtypes.
     dysregulated gene sets between the five SSCS subtypes. In the heatmap, columns correspond to different subtypes in the
                                                                         In the  heatmap,   columns    correspond   to different subtypes
        three
     three    cohorts,
            cohorts,    and
                      and  rows to to
                             rows     gene
                                   gene     sets.
                                          sets.          in in
                                                    Values
                                                Values       thethe heatmap
                                                                  heatmap     were
                                                                            were   −log10                                                    color
                                                                                                                                        Red color
                                                                                                                         transformed. Red
                                                                                                               p-value)transformed.
                                                                                                     adjustedp-value)
                                                                                             (FDRadjusted
                                                                                     −log10(FDR
        indicates up-regulated gene sets, and green means down-regulated gene sets in the corresponding groups. Gene sets were
     indicates up-regulated gene sets, and green means down-regulated gene sets in the corresponding groups. Gene sets were
        grouped into different functional categories, with representative functional names shown on the right hand of the heatmap
     grouped into different functional categories, with representative functional names shown on the right hand of the heatmap
        accompanied by a colored line, respectively (such as light red for EMT-related, light green for cell cycle-related, and blue
     accompanied     by a coloredgene
        for metabolism-related     line,sets).
                                         respectively    (such proportion
                                                The patient’s    as light red bar
                                                                              for EMT-related,
                                                                                   plots illustratelight green for cell
                                                                                                     the percentage      cycle-related,
                                                                                                                      intersections     and blue
                                                                                                                                     between   the
         metabolism-related
     forSSCS and   CMS labels ingene
                                   thesets).
                                       TCGA  The    patient’s
                                                 (b),          proportion
                                                      CPTAC (c),    and GEO      plots
                                                                            bar(d) cohorts.  The the
                                                                                        illustrate      percentage
                                                                                                  patient’s          intersections
                                                                                                              proportion bar        illustrate the
                                                                                                                              plots between    the
     SSCS and   CMS labels
        percentage            in the
                     intersections    TCGA the
                                   between    (b), SSCS
                                                    CPTAC and(c),
                                                               MSI and GEOin(d)
                                                                     labels    thecohorts.
                                                                                   TCGA (e) The  patient’s
                                                                                               and               cohorts.bar plots illustrate the
                                                                                                            proportion
                                                                                                     CPTAC (f)
     percentage intersections between the SSCS and MSI labels in the TCGA (e) and CPTAC (f) cohorts.
                                             We next investigated the relationships among SSCS labels with patients’ characteris-
                                       tics, and  the results
                                     3.5. Prognostic           suggested
                                                        Value of  SSCS      no significant associations between SSCS with patients’ age
                                             gender
                                       andThere    were significant differences insubtyping
                                                      (data  not  shown).   Patients’               and OSby
                                                                                        both DFS results        using the
                                                                                                             among     CMS     and
                                                                                                                            five    MSIsubtypes
                                                                                                                                 SSCS     systems
                                       were   also  compared     to the  SSCS   labels. From   the TCGA     cohort,  85%   of
                                     (Figures 5a–d and S4). Pairwise comparison of survival differences among patient groups   the patients   with
                                       the SSCS4
                                     showed     thatlabels
                                                      SSCS2werehadCMS4    patients,
                                                                     the best  DFS andandthe
                                                                                           OS;remaining
                                                                                                SSCS4 had  15%thewere from
                                                                                                                   worst;     CMS2;
                                                                                                                            and        in contrast
                                                                                                                                  the remaining
                                       to the  SSCS5,    where   62%   of the  patients   were   with the  CMS2    labels
                                     three subtypes had intermediate survivals (Figures 5b,d and S4). Multivariate Cox     (Figure    4b). Similar
                                                                                                                                                PH
                                       trends   can  be seen  from   the CPTAC     and  GEO   cohorts,  such   as SSCS4  patients
                                     regression analysis supported these findings (Figure 5e–g). The associations of SSCS labels     correspond-
                                     with   to CMS4,
                                       ing patient      and theadjusted
                                                     survival     large proportion     of the patients
                                                                           for age, gender,   and other from   SSCS2
                                                                                                          factors     and
                                                                                                                   were      SSCS5 have
                                                                                                                          significant        CMS2
                                                                                                                                        (log-rank
                                       labels  (Figure   4c,d),
                                                         − 4    although    the  patient’s  proportions   have   minor  changes
                                     p-value < 1 × 10 ) with high HRs for SSCS4 and SSCS3, and low HRs for SSCS2, implying          compared     to
                                       the  TCGA     cohort  (Figure   4b). The  frequency    of MSI-H   cases  was  highest
                                     that SSCS4 is a poor prognostic factor for DFS, which has been observed from the three     in SSCS1    (64.2%
                                       in TCGA,
                                     cohorts;      and
                                                 and     47.6%
                                                      SSCS2      in CPTAC)
                                                               had             compared
                                                                    significantly                  remaining
                                                                                            to theDFS
                                                                                     improved                   four subtypes
                                                                                                       in the TCGA     cohort (HR (Figure   4e,f).
                                                                                                                                        0.17,  95%
                                     CI 0.08–0.36, p < 0.001), although the difference in the GEO and CPTAC cohorts were not
                                       3.5. Prognostic Value of SSCS
                                     statistically significant (Figure 5e–g).
                                             There were significant differences in both DFS and OS among the five SSCS subtypes
                                       (Figures 5a–d and Figure S4). Pairwise comparison of survival differences among patient
                                       groups showed that SSCS2 had the best DFS and OS; SSCS4 had the worst; and the re-
                                       maining three subtypes had intermediate survivals (Figures 5b,d and Figure S4). Multi-
                                      variate Cox PH regression analysis supported these findings (Figure 5e–g). The associa-
                                      tions of SSCS labels with patient survival adjusted for age, gender, and other factors were
                                      significant (log-rank p-value < 1 × 10−4) with high HRs for SSCS4 and SSCS3, and low HRs
                                      for SSCS2, implying that SSCS4 is a poor prognostic factor for DFS, which has been ob-
                                      served from the three cohorts; and SSCS2 had significantly improved DFS in the TCGA
Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815                                                                                                  11 of 16
                                      cohort (HR 0.17, 95% CI 0.08–0.36, p < 0.001), although the difference in the GEO and
                                      CPTAC cohorts were not statistically significant (Figure 5e–g).




      Figure   5. SSCS
       Figure 5.  SSCS subtypes
                         subtypes clinical
                                    clinicalcharacteristics.
                                             characteristics.Kaplan–Meier
                                                             Kaplan–Meiersurvival
                                                                               survivalcurves   comparingDFS
                                                                                        curvescomparing                thefive
                                                                                                              DFSofofthe    fiveSSCS
                                                                                                                                 SSCSsubtypes
                                                                                                                                       subtypes in
      thethe
       in  TCGA
              TCGA (a) (a)
                       andand
                            GEOGEO(c) (c)
                                      cohorts.  TheThe
                                          cohorts.   indicated  p-values
                                                        indicated         were
                                                                   p-values     calculated
                                                                              were         with
                                                                                   calculated  with   log-rank
                                                                                                 thethe          tests.
                                                                                                          log-rank      Summary
                                                                                                                     tests. Summary  tables    the
                                                                                                                                            of of
                                                                                                                                        tables
       the pairwise
      pairwise        comparisons
                 comparisons     of of   survival
                                     urvival       curves
                                              curves      between
                                                       between  the the
                                                                     fivefive
                                                                          SSCSSSCS  subtypes
                                                                                subtypes      in the
                                                                                          in the TCGA TCGA     andand
                                                                                                          (b) (b)   GEO GEO(d) (d) cohorts.
                                                                                                                               cohorts.      Sur-
                                                                                                                                         Survival
       vival differences    were tested   using the log-rank  tests, with  FDR  adjusted p-values   less than   0.05 were   considered
      differences were tested using the log-rank tests, with FDR adjusted p-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically          statisti-
       cally significant
      significant          and displayed
                   and displayed    in red in red colors.
                                            colors. Forest Forest
                                                           plots ofplots
                                                                     Cox of
                                                                         PHCox   PH regression
                                                                              regression models models
                                                                                                 illustrated   the HRs,the
                                                                                                           illustrated    95%       and CIs
                                                                                                                                CIs95%
                                                                                                                             HRs,            and
                                                                                                                                         log-rank
       log-rank p-values for different subtyping systems (SSCS, MSI, CMS, etc.) and confounder factors (age, gender, etc.) for
      p-values for different subtyping systems (SSCS, MSI, CMS, etc.) and confounder factors (age, gender, etc.) for DFS in the
       DFS in the TCGA (e), CPTAC (f), and GEO (g) cohorts. Log-rank p-value significance levels were given by stars: * <0.05,
      TCGA (e), CPTAC (f), and GEO (g) cohorts. Log-rank p-value significance levels were given by stars: * <0.05, ** <0.01, and
       ** <0.01, and *** <0.001.
      *** <0.001.
                                           The enrichment scores for 64 cell components in the tumor microenvironment (TME),
                                           The enrichment scores for 64 cell components in the tumor microenvironment (TME),
                                      spanning multiple innate and adaptive immune, extracellular matrix, and other cell types
                                      spanning multiple innate and adaptive immune, extracellular matrix, and other cell types
                                      were estimated by using a gene signature-based method, xcell [31]. Three additional
                                      were estimated by using a gene signature-based method, xcell [31]. Three additional
                                      scores (immune, stroma, and microenvironment scores) were obtained by summing all
                                      scores (immune, stroma, and microenvironment scores) were obtained by summing all
                                      immune, stromal, and immune plus stromal cell types, respectively [31], which were used
                                      immune, stromal, and immune plus stromal cell types, respectively [31], which were
                                      to represent the tumor purity of each sample. For the TCGA training cohort, SSCS1 and
                                      used to represent the tumor purity of each sample. For the TCGA training cohort, SSCS1
                                      SSCS4 had the highest average ImmuneScore and StromaScore compared to the remain-
                                      and SSCS4 had the highest average ImmuneScore and StromaScore compared to the
                                      ing SSCS subtypes, respectively (Figure S5). Pairwise comparisons of StromaScores
                                      remaining SSCS subtypes, respectively (Figure S5). Pairwise comparisons of StromaScores
                                      among
                                      among the
                                              the SSCS
                                                  SSCS subtypes
                                                         subtypes indicated
                                                                   indicated that
                                                                               that the
                                                                                     thedifferences
                                                                                         differencesbetween
                                                                                                      betweenSSCS4
                                                                                                               SSCS4and
                                                                                                                      andthe
                                                                                                                           theother
                                                                                                                               otherfour
                                                                                                                                     four
                                      subtypes
                                      subtypes were all significant (adjusted p-value < 0) (Figure S5). Only SSCS1 andSSCS5
                                                were   all significant (adjusted   p-value   < 0) (Figure S5).  Only SSCS1   and   SSCS5
                                      have
                                      have significant
                                            significant differences
                                                        differences in
                                                                     in their
                                                                        their ImmuneScores
                                                                              ImmuneScores (adjusted
                                                                                                 (adjusted p-value
                                                                                                           p-value <<0).
                                                                                                                      0).SSCS4
                                                                                                                          SSCS4also
                                                                                                                                 alsohas
                                                                                                                                      has
                                      the highest average   MicroenvironmentScore,       which  is the summation   of the
                                      the highest average MicroenvironmentScore, which is the summation of the ImmuneScoreImmuneScore
                                      and
                                      and StromaScore.
                                           StromaScore.All Allpairwise
                                                               pairwisecomparisons
                                                                          comparisons   ofof
                                                                                           MicroenvironmentScore
                                                                                              MicroenvironmentScore   between  SSCS4
                                                                                                                         between      or
                                                                                                                                   SSCS4
                                      SSCS1   with  the remaining   subtypes    were   significant  (adjusted  p-value < 0) (Figure
                                      or SSCS1 with the remaining subtypes were significant (adjusted p-value < 0) (Figure S5).      S5).
                                      The pairwise comparisons of the ImmuneScore, StromaScore, and MicroenvironmentScore
                                      were also evaluated in the CPTAC and GEO cohorts (Figure S5). The SSCS4 stands out to
                                      have the highest TME scores, which indicated that the patients classified into the SSCS4
                                      subtype have relatively lower tumor purities.
                                           From the TCGA cohort, we found the abundances of a subset of TME cell types
                                      have prognostic power as determined by using the univariate Cox analysis (Wald test
                                      p-value < 0.05). More specifically, of the 64 cell types investigated, neuron was identified
                                      to be significantly associated with poor DFS and OS ((beta coefficients > 0; Wald test
                                      p-value < 0.05; Table S7). Of note, neuron is one of the main active cell types within the en-
Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815                                                                                               12 of 16




                             teric nervous system (ENS), which is interrelated with the immune system [32]. Fibroblast
                             was significantly associated with poor DFS (beta coefficients > 0; Wald test p-value < 0.05;
                             Table S7), whereas memory CD4+ T and conventional dendritic cells (cDC) were sig-
                             nificantly associated with favorable DFS (beta coefficients < 0; Wald test p-value < 0.05;
                             Table S7). Two other cell types, namely naive B and naive CD4+ T cells, were identified
                             to be significantly associated with poor OS (beta coefficients < 0; Wald test p-value < 0.05;
                             Table S7).
                                   We next evaluated the six TME cell types (neuron, fibroblast, memory CD4+ T, cDC,
                             naive B and naive CD4+ T cells) prognostic performances within the SSCS subtyping
                             system. For each cell type, Cox regression models were built to stratify the patients within
                             each SSCS subtype, and log-rank tests were utilized to test the survival differences between
                             the high- and low-risk groups, respectively. No cell types can be used to stratify the patients
                             into prognostic groups for OS (Table 2). Two cell types (fibroblast and cDC) were identified
                             to be useful for identifying high- and low-risk groups within the SSCS subtyping system for
                             DFS (log-rank p < 0.05; Table 2). More specifically, tumor-infiltrating fibroblast was found
                             to be predictive for poor DFS only within the SSCS4 subtype (Table 2). From the TCGA
                             SSCS4 patients (n = 45), we built a Cox model and calculated the median risk score (−0.059).
                             The model was applied to classify the SSCS4 patients both from the TCGA (n = 45) and
                             GEO (n = 79) cohorts into high-risk (>−0.059) and low-risk (<−0.059) groups. Compared
                             with patients with low-risk scores, patients with high-risk scores had shorter DFS (TCGA:
                             HR 4.9, 95% CI 1.7–14.3, p = 0.001; GEO: HR 1.9, 95% CI 1.0–3.6, p = 0.045) (Figure 6a,b).
                             cDC, on the contrary, was associated with favorable DFS in the SSCS3 subtype. Cox model
                             was built by using the abundance of the cDC, and patients were classified into high-risk
                             (<0.054) and low-risk (>0.054) groups based on the median risk score (0.054) determined
                             in the SSCS3 subtype from the TCGA cohort (n = 79). Patients with low-risk scores had
                             favorable DFS (TCGA: HR 1.9, 95% CI 1.0–3.4, p = 0.035; GEO: HR 1.7, 95% CI 1.0–2.8,
                             p = 0.037) (Figure 6c,d).
                             Table 2. Log rank p-values from survival analysis for the six TME cell types.

                                                                                Memory                                  Naive
                                          Subtype        Neuron    Fibroblast                  cDC           Naive B
                                                                                CD4+ T                                 CD4+ T
                                           SSCS1           0.062     0.500       0.980         0.320          0.680      1
                                           SSCS2           0.080      1          0.130         0.330          0.130      1
                               DFS         SSCS3           0.200      1          0.059        0.008 **        0.830      1
                                           SSCS4           0.290   0.001 **      0.540         0.570          0.870      1
                                           SSCS5           0.710      1          0.320         0.520            1       0.540
                                             All           0.064     0.120       0.090        0.008 **        0.140     0.460
                                           SSCS1           0.710     0.190       0.510         0.810          0.750      1
                                           SSCS2           0.260      1          0.086         0.630          0.390      1
                                OS         SSCS3           0.170      1          0.190         0.058          0.450     0.870
                                           SSCS4           0.270     0.340       0.120         0.560          0.310     0.620
                                           SSCS5           0.580     0.200       0.058         0.570            1        1
                                             All           0.100     0.210       0.610         0.510          0.810     0.720
                             ** Significant difference p < 0.01.
Biomedicines 2021,
  Biomedicines     9, 9,
               2021,  1815
                         x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                      13of
                                                                                                                                               13  of16
                                                                                                                                                      16




       Figure6.6.Two
     Figure         TwoCox    modelsbuilt
                         Coxmodels     builtby
                                             byusing
                                                 usingthe
                                                       the TME-associated
                                                           TME-associated fibroblast and cDC.
                                                                                           cDC. A A Cox
                                                                                                     Cox model
                                                                                                          model built
                                                                                                                  builtby
                                                                                                                        byusing
                                                                                                                           usingtumor-
                                                                                                                                  tumor-
       infiltrating  fibroblast in the TCGA   SSCS4  patients (n = 45), which can be
     infiltrating fibroblast in the TCGA SSCS4 patients (n = 45), which can be used  used to classify the SSCS4
                                                                                                          SSCS4 patients both fromthe
                                                                                                                 patients both from  the
       TCGA     (a) and  GEO   (b)  cohorts into high- and  low-risk groups.  Another  Cox  model
     TCGA (a) and GEO (b) cohorts into high- and low-risk groups. Another Cox model built by using  built by using the TME-associated
                                                                                                               the TME-associated   cDC
       cDC in the TCGA SSCS3 patients (n = 79), which can be used to classify the SSCS3 patients both from the TCGA (c) and
     in the TCGA SSCS3 patients (n = 79), which can be used to classify the SSCS3 patients both from the TCGA (c) and GEO
       GEO (d) cohorts into high- and low-risk groups.
     (d) cohorts into high- and low-risk groups.
                                    4. Discussion
                                   4. Discussion
                                          We systematically evaluated the molecular and clinical implications of three previ-
                                    ous We
                                         CRC  systematically     evaluated
                                                subtyping systems:        TNM  thestage,
                                                                                    molecular
                                                                                            MSI andand clinical
                                                                                                        CMS. TNM  implications
                                                                                                                         stage is of   three
                                                                                                                                     one       previous
                                                                                                                                          of the   most
                                   CRC   subtyping     systems:    TNM    stage,   MSI   and   CMS.   TNM     stage   is one
                                    important determinants of survival, and it is essential for complementarity with other es-of  the most   important
                                   determinants
                                    tablished systemsof survival,
                                                           for betterand   it is essential
                                                                      treatment               for complementarity
                                                                                      decision-making       in CRC. Althoughwith other
                                                                                                                                     MSI-H established
                                                                                                                                              has been
                                   systems    for better  treatment    decision-making         in  CRC.   Although
                                    used as a biomarker for immunotherapy and predicting prognosis, MSI-H only accounts  MSI-H     has been   used as a
                                   biomarker
                                    for about 15%, and substantial heterogeneity still exists within the remaining 85% about
                                                 for immunotherapy          and   predicting     prognosis,      MSI-H     only   accounts    for  non-
                                   15%,
                                    MSI-Handpatients.
                                               substantial
                                                         CMS heterogeneity      still exists
                                                                is a well-defined             within thesystem
                                                                                        classification     remaining[18], 85%
                                                                                                                           but wenon-MSI-H
                                                                                                                                     and others patients.
                                                                                                                                                   [19–
                                   CMS    is a well-defined     classification    system     [18],  but we   and   others
                                    21] have found its applications in advanced-stage CRC cases is limited. Revealing CRC    [19–21]   have   found   its
                                   applications    in  advanced-stage       CRC     cases  is limited.   Revealing
                                    heterogeneity based solely on TNM stage, MSI, or CMS is incomplete. When any of the  CRC   heterogeneity      based
                                   solely   on TNM
                                    two systems     werestage,  MSI, orsimultaneously,
                                                           considered      CMS is incomplete.   however,When onlyany     of the two
                                                                                                                    applicable     for asystems
                                                                                                                                         subset ofwere
                                                                                                                                                    the
                                   considered     simultaneously,      however,       only   applicable     for  a subset
                                    patients. More specifically, TNM stage + MSI for non-MSI-H cases and TNM stage + CMS      of the  patients.    More
                                   specifically,  TNM
                                    for early stage       stage +TNM
                                                       patients.    MSI for    non-MSI-H
                                                                           stage   provides cases      and TNM
                                                                                                additional           stage
                                                                                                               insight   into+ CRC
                                                                                                                                CMSheterogeneity,
                                                                                                                                       for early stage
                                   patients.   TNM    stage   provides    additional      insight
                                    and remains an influential factor for CRC subtype analysis.     into  CRC    heterogeneity,       and  remains an
                                   influential   factor  for CRC    subtype     analysis.
                                          Variations in genomic features and clinical outcomes have been observed in CRC
                                    within the sameintumor
                                        Variations         genomic
                                                                 stage.features
                                                                         One of the andbest
                                                                                          clinical   outcomes
                                                                                              examples     is thathave     beenetobserved
                                                                                                                    De Sousa        al. defined inthree
                                                                                                                                                   CRC
                                   within
                                    molecularthe same    tumor distinct
                                                  and clinical    stage. One      of thefrom
                                                                            subtypes        best aexamples
                                                                                                    cohort ofis90that     De Sousa
                                                                                                                     patients     with et  al. defined
                                                                                                                                        stage   II CRC
                                   three   molecular    and   clinical   distinct    subtypes     from   a cohort    of  90
                                    [15]. Previous studies [33,34] have identified several stage-independent variables such   patients   with   stageasII
                                   CRC    [15].  Previous    studies    [33,34]   have    identified    several    stage-independent
                                    MSI status and tumor grade, which correlated with patients’ clinical outcomes. For exam-                  variables
                                   such  as mentioned
                                    ple, as   MSI status earlier,
                                                            and tumor MSI-H grade,    whichwho
                                                                                patients,      correlated
                                                                                                    usually with
                                                                                                               havepatients’       clinical outcomes.
                                                                                                                       good prognosis,       are more
                                   For
                                    common in early stages than late stages of CRC. Indeed, in our study, weprognosis,
                                       example,     as  mentioned     earlier,   MSI-H     patients,  who    usually     have   good     found thatare a
                                   more
                                    highercommon      in early
                                              percentage         stagespatients
                                                            of MSI-H     than latewere stages  of CRC. Indeed,
                                                                                            distributed    into thein     our study,
                                                                                                                       SSCS1    subtype,we which
                                                                                                                                            found that
                                                                                                                                                    de-
                                     higher
                                   arived      percentage
                                            from   early casesof MSI-H
                                                                  and have patients     wereclinical
                                                                                favorable       distributed     into the
                                                                                                        outcomes.           SSCS1 subtype,
                                                                                                                       Moreover,      early- and  which
                                                                                                                                                    ad-
                                   derived from early cases and have favorable clinical outcomes. Moreover, early- and
                                   advanced-cases have significant clinical and molecular differences only for non-MSI-H
                                   patients. According to several multivariate statistical analyses [33,34], higher tumor grade
Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815                                                                                         14 of 16




                             is a stage-independent prognostic factor in CRC associated with adverse outcomes. In
                             the current study, due to lack of the information, we did not take the tumor grade into
                             consideration when classifying the patients. Future investigations of grade relating to the
                             CRC heterogeneity is needed.
                                   In the current study, we developed a new CRC subtyping system SSCS, which takes
                             the TNM stage as an independent factor. Although the four TNM stages of CRC generally
                             showed significant differences in both DFS and OS (Figure S1), the assignment of tumor
                             stage for each patient is subjective and depends on experience. As there are no molecular
                             level information involved in the four TNM stages, in our study, we did a binary split of the
                             TNM stage into early- and advanced-stages (advanced cases have local or distant metastasis,
                             which is distinguishable from the early cases). By integrating supervised stage information
                             into the unsupervised machine learning frameworks, a total of five CRC subtypes (SSCS1-5)
                             were identified and described. Patients with early-stage CRC were classified into two
                             subtypes (SSCS1-2), which generally have good prognosis. MSI-H patients were basically
                             classified into the SSCS1 subtype. Multiple cell cycle and metabolism-related gene sets
                             were upregulated, and ECM related gene sets were down-regulated in the SSCS2 subtype.
                             Advanced-stage CRC is either metastatic or locally invasive at the time of diagnosis. Three
                             advanced-stage CRC subtypes (SSCS3-5) were identified from the study. Although SSCS3
                             and SSCS2 subtypes have been enriched with similar functional categories of gene sets,
                             SSCS3 patients have relatively worse survival compared to SSCS2 patients. SSCS4 subtype
                             has low tumor purities and was associated with the worst clinical outcomes. Of note,
                             high frequency of the mesenchymal CMS4 patients were classified into the SSCS4 subtype,
                             indicating the reliability and validity of our results. The SSCS5 subtype has relatively
                             good survival compared to the other two advanced-stage subtypes, and was enriched with
                             amplicon-associated gene sets.
                                   Tumor microenvironment consists of multiple cell types including tumor cells, fibrob-
                             lasts, lymphocytes, and many other cell types. The non-cancerous cells are important in
                             cancer treatment as well as considered to be independent prognostic factors for clinical
                             outcome prediction. For example, tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) therapy is by far the
                             most effective treatment for advanced melanoma [35]. Tumor-infiltrating fibroblasts, or
                             called cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs), are one of the key components within the TME,
                             which is involved in the formation of the extracellular matrix in tumor tissues. Integrating
                             CAF-targeted agents with existing therapies could provide benefit in treating cancer pa-
                             tients [36]. Moreover, activated tumor-infiltrating fibroblasts correlated with lymph node
                             metastasis, and can be used to predict worse DFS and OS in breast cancer patients [37].
                             High levels of TILs were associated with improved survival in CRC [38]. In our study,
                             we investigated 64 TME cell types, and determined the relevance of the abundance of
                             two cell types to clinical outcomes within the SSCS subtyping system. More specifically,
                             tumor-infiltrating fibroblast was found to be predictive for poor DFS only within the SSCS4
                             subtype. cDC, which are antigen-presenting cells that drive T-cell cytokine responses [39],
                             were associated with favorable DFS in the SSCS3 subtype. Further exploration of the sub-
                             type specific TME cells has the potential to be novel therapeutic targets for the treatment
                             of CRC.

                             5. Conclusions
                                  In summary, CRC is heterogeneous and should not be treated as a single disease.
                             Histopathological features such as the TNM stage can be useful for unsupervised classifica-
                             tion of CRC. Our newly proposed CRC subtyping system SSCS could not only yield better
                             stratification results than the current standards, but also help us gain more insights into
                             CRC heterogeneity and its implications for therapy.
Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815                                                                                                               15 of 16




                                    Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/
                                    10.3390/biomedicines9121815/s1, Figure S1. Kaplan-Meier survival curves for the 4 TNM stages.
                                    Figure S2: Multivariate COX PH forest plots for OS, Figure S3: Kaplan–Meier survival curves for the
                                    Stage_MSI and Stage_CMS systems, Figure S4: Kaplan–Meier survival curves and multivariate COX
                                    PH forest plots for OS, Figure S5: Boxplots of the immune, stroma, and microenvironment scores
                                    across the five SSCS subtypes, Table S1: 92 dysregulated gene sets between advanced- and early stage
                                    of CRC identified from the three cohorts, Table S2: 537 dysregulated gene sets between MSI-H and
                                    non-MSI-H cases identified from the TCGA and CPTAC cohorts, Table S3: 94 dysregulated gene sets
                                    between early_MSI-H, early_non-MSI-H, advanced_MSI-H, and advanced_non-MSI-H identified
                                    from the TCGA and CPTAC cohorts, Table S4: 89 dysregulated gene sets between CMS 1-4 (in early
                                    stage) and CMS 1-4 (in advanced-stage) identified from the three cohorts, Table S5: Selected gene
                                    subsets for pre-selection, consensus clustering, and classifier building, Table S6: 103 dysregulated
                                    gene sets between the five SSCS subtypes, Table S7: Significant tumor-infiltrating cell types associated
                                    with DFS and OS.
                                    Author Contributions: Conceptualization, L.Z.; methodology, L.Z.; validation, L.Z. and Y.P.; for-
                                    mal analysis, L.Z.; investigation, L.Z.; resources, L.Z.; data curation, L.Z.; writing—original draft
                                    preparation, L.Z.; writing—review and editing, L.Z.; visualization, L.Z.; supervision, Y.P.; project
                                    administration, Y.P.; funding acquisition, Y.P. All authors have read and agreed to the published
                                    version of the manuscript.
                                    Funding: This research was funded by the Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (No. KQTD202008
                                    20113106007).
                                    Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                    Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                    Data Availability Statement: Public datasets were downloaded from the TCGAcrcmRNA package
                                    (version 1.14.0), LinkedOmics (http://linkedomics.org/cptac-colon/; Accessed on 15 August 2019),
                                    and cBioPortal (http://www.cbioportal.org; Accessed on 15 August 2019).
                                    Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

References
1.    Nguyen, H.T.; Duong, H.-Q. The Molecular Characteristics of Colorectal Cancer: Implications for Diagnosis and Therapy. Oncol.
      Lett. 2018, 16, 9–18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Bae, J.H.; Kim, J.H.; Lee, J.; Kye, B.-H.; Lee, S.C.; Lee, I.K.; Kang, W.K.; Cho, H.-M.; Lee, Y.S. Addition of V-Stage to Conventional
      TNM Staging to Create the TNVM Staging System for Accurate Prediction of Prognosis in Colon Cancer: A Multi-Institutional
      Retrospective Cohort Study. Biomedicines 2021, 9, 888. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.    Lengauer, C.; Kinzler, K.W.; Vogelstein, B. Genetic Instabilities in Human Cancers. Nature 1998, 396, 643–649. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.    Ogino, S.; Goel, A. Molecular Classification and Correlates in Colorectal Cancer. J. Mol. Diagn. 2008, 10, 13–27. [CrossRef]
5.    Vilar, E.; Gruber, S.B. Microsatellite Instability in Colorectal Cancer-the Stable Evidence. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 2010, 7, 153–162.
      [CrossRef]
6.    Tóth, G.; Gáspári, Z.; Jurka, J. Microsatellites in Different Eukaryotic Genomes: Survey and Analysis. Genome Res. 2000, 10,
      967–981. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.    Kawakami, H.; Zaanan, A.; Sinicrope, F.A. Microsatellite Instability Testing and Its Role in the Management of Colorectal Cancer.
      Curr. Treat. Options Oncol. 2015, 16, 30. [CrossRef]
8.    Yamamoto, H.; Imai, K. Microsatellite Instability: An Update. Arch. Toxicol. 2015, 89, 899–921. [CrossRef]
9.    Nojadeh, J.N.; Behrouz Sharif, S.; Sakhinia, E. Microsatellite Instability in Colorectal Cancer. EXCLI J. 2018, 17, 159–168.
10.   Kim, G.P.; Colangelo, L.H.; Samuel Wieand, H.; Paik, S.; Kirsch, I.R.; Wolmark, N.; Allegra, C.J. Prognostic and Predictive Roles
      of High-Degree Microsatellite Instability in Colon Cancer: A National Cancer Institute–National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and
      Bowel Project Collaborative Study. J. Clin. Oncol. 2007, 25, 767–772. [CrossRef]
11.   Li, K.; Luo, H.; Huang, L.; Luo, H.; Zhu, X. Microsatellite Instability: A Review of What the Oncologist Should Know. Cancer Cell
      Int. 2020, 20, 16. [CrossRef]
12.   Budinska, E.; Popovici, V.; Tejpar, S.; D’Ario, G.; Lapique, N.; Sikora, K.O.; Di Narzo, A.F.; Yan, P.; Hodgson, J.G.; Weinrich, S.; et al.
      Gene Expression Patterns Unveil a New Level of Molecular Heterogeneity in Colorectal Cancer. J. Pathol. 2013, 231, 63–76.
      [CrossRef]
13.   Marisa, L.; de Reyniès, A.; Duval, A.; Selves, J.; Gaub, M.P.; Vescovo, L.; Etienne-Grimaldi, M.-C.; Schiappa, R.; Guenot, D.;
      Ayadi, M.; et al. Gene Expression Classification of Colon Cancer into Molecular Subtypes: Characterization, Validation, and
      Prognostic Value. PLoS Med. 2013, 10, e1001453. [CrossRef]
Biomedicines 2021, 9, 1815                                                                                                            16 of 16




14.   Roepman, P.; Schlicker, A.; Tabernero, J.; Majewski, I.; Tian, S.; Moreno, V.; Snel, M.H.; Chresta, C.M.; Rosenberg, R.;
      Nitsche, U.; et al. Colorectal Cancer Intrinsic Subtypes Predict Chemotherapy Benefit, Deficient Mismatch Repair and Epithelial-
      to-Mesenchymal Transition. Int. J. Cancer 2014, 134, 552–562. [CrossRef]
15.   Felipe De Sousa, E.M.; Wang, X.; Jansen, M.; Fessler, E.; Trinh, A.; de Rooij, L.P.; de Jong, J.H.; de Boer, O.J.; van Leersum, R.;
      Bijlsma, M.F.; et al. Poor-Prognosis Colon Cancer Is Defined by a Molecularly Distinct Subtype and Develops from Serrated
      Precursor Lesions. Nat. Med. 2013, 19, 614–618. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.   Sadanandam, A.; Lyssiotis, C.A.; Homicsko, K.; Collisson, E.A.; Gibb, W.J.; Wullschleger, S.; Ostos, L.C.G.; Lannon, W.A.;
      Grotzinger, C.; Del Rio, M.; et al. A Colorectal Cancer Classification System That Associates Cellular Phenotype and Responses to
      Therapy. Nat. Med. 2013, 19, 619–625. [CrossRef]
17.   Schlicker, A.; Beran, G.; Chresta, C.M.; McWalter, G.; Pritchard, A.; Weston, S.; Runswick, S.; Davenport, S.; Heathcote, K.;
      Castro, D.A.; et al. Subtypes of Primary Colorectal Tumors Correlate with Response to Targeted Treatment in Colorectal Cell
      Lines. BMC Med. Genom. 2012, 5, 66. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.   Guinney, J.; Dienstmann, R.; Wang, X.; de Reyniès, A.; Schlicker, A.; Soneson, C.; Marisa, L.; Roepman, P.; Nyamundanda, G.;
      Angelino, P.; et al. The Consensus Molecular Subtypes of Colorectal Cancer. Nat. Med. 2015, 21, 1350–1356. [CrossRef]
19.   Mooi, J.K.; Wirapati, P.; Asher, R.; Lee, C.K.; Savas, P.; Price, T.J.; Townsend, A.; Hardingham, J.; Buchanan, D.; Williams, D.; et al.
      The Prognostic Impact of Consensus Molecular Subtypes (CMS) and Its Predictive Effects for Bevacizumab Benefit in Metastatic
      Colorectal Cancer: Molecular Analysis of the AGITG MAX Clinical Trial. Ann. Oncol. 2018, 29, 2240–2246. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.   Lenz, H.-J.; Ou, F.-S.; Venook, A.P.; Hochster, H.S.; Niedzwiecki, D.; Goldberg, R.M.; Mayer, R.J.; Bertagnolli, M.M.; Blanke, C.D.;
      Zemla, T.; et al. Impact of Consensus Molecular Subtype on Survival in Patients with Metastatic Colorectal Cancer: Results from
      CALGB/SWOG 80405 (alliance). J. Clin. Oncol. 2019, 37, 1876–1885. [CrossRef]
21.   Pfeiffer, P.; Qvortrup, C. Does the Consensus Molecular Subtypes Classification Add to Selection of Precision Medicine in Patients
      with Metastatic Colorectal Cancer? Dig. Med. Res. 2020, 3. [CrossRef]
22.   Vasaikar, S.; Huang, C.; Wang, X.; Petyuk, V.A.; Savage, S.R.; Wen, B.; Dou, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Shi, Z.; Arshad, O.A.; et al. Proteogenomic
      Analysis of Human Colon Cancer Reveals New Therapeutic Opportunities. Cell 2019, 177, 1035–1049.e19. [CrossRef]
23.   Mestres, A.C.; Llergo, A.B.; Attolini, C.S.-O.; Mestres, M.A.C. Package “Mcsurvdata.”. Available online: https://bioconductor.
      org/packages/3.14/data/experiment/ (accessed on 15 August 2019).
24.   Ritchie, M.E.; Phipson, B.; Wu, D.; Hu, Y.; Law, C.W.; Shi, W.; Smyth, G.K. Limma Powers Differential Expression Analyses for
      RNA-Sequencing and Microarray Studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015, 43, e47. [CrossRef]
25.   Väremo, L.; Nielsen, J.; Nookaew, I. Enriching the Gene Set Analysis of Genome-Wide Data by Incorporating Directionality of
      Gene Expression and Combining Statistical Hypotheses and Methods. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013, 41, 4378–4391. [CrossRef]
26.   Kolde, R. Pheatmap: Pretty Heatmaps. R Package Version 2012, 1. Available online: https://rdrr.io/cran/pheatmap/ (accessed on
      15 August 2019).
27.   Kassambara, A.; Kosinski, M.; Biecek, P.; Fabian, S. Survminer: Drawing Survival Curves using’ggplot20 . R Package Version 0.3.
      2017, 1. Available online: https://rpkgs.datanovia.com/survminer/ (accessed on 15 August 2019).
28.   Cirocchi, R.; Cesare Campanile, F.; Di Saverio, S.; Popivanov, G.; Carlini, L.; Pironi, D.; Tabola, R.; Vettoretto, N. Laparoscopic
      versus Open Colectomy for Obstructing Right Colon Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J. Visc. Surg. 2017, 154,
      387–399. [CrossRef]
29.   Wilkerson, M.D.; Hayes, D.N. ConsensusClusterPlus: A Class Discovery Tool with Confidence Assessments and Item Tracking.
      Bioinformatics 2010, 26, 1572–1573. [CrossRef]
30.   Liaw, A.; Wiener, M. Others Classification and Regression by randomForest. R News 2002, 2, 18–22.
31.   Aran, D.; Hu, Z.; Butte, A.J. xCell: Digitally Portraying the Tissue Cellular Heterogeneity Landscape. Genome Biol. 2017, 18, 220.
      [CrossRef]
32.   Yoo, B.B.; Mazmanian, S.K. The Enteric Network: Interactions between the Immune and Nervous Systems of the Gut. Immunity
      2017, 46, 910–926. [CrossRef]
33.   Mori, T.; Hirota, T.; Ohashi, Y.; Kodaira, S. Prospective Trial of Adjuvant Chemotherapy for Colon Cancer Study Group (PAC)
      Significance of Histologic Type of Primary Lesion and Metastatic Lymph Nodes as a Prognostic Factor in Stage III Colon Cancer.
      Dis. Colon Rectum 2006, 49, 982–992. [CrossRef]
34.   Compton, C.C. Optimal Pathologic Staging: Defining Stage II Disease. Clin. Cancer Res. 2007, 13, 6862s–6870s. [CrossRef]
35.   Rohaan, M.W.; van den Berg, J.H.; Kvistborg, P.; Haanen, J.B.A.G. Adoptive Transfer of Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocytes in
      Melanoma: A Viable Treatment Option. J. Immunother Cancer 2018, 6, 102. [CrossRef]
36.   Sahai, E.; Astsaturov, I.; Cukierman, E.; DeNardo, D.G.; Egeblad, M.; Evans, R.M.; Fearon, D.; Greten, F.R.; Hingorani, S.R.;
      Hunter, T.; et al. A Framework for Advancing Our Understanding of Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2020, 20,
      174–186. [CrossRef]
37.   Hu, G.; Xu, F.; Zhong, K.; Wang, S.; Huang, L.; Chen, W. Activated Tumor-Infiltrating Fibroblasts Predict Worse Prognosis in
      Breast Cancer Patients. J. Cancer 2018, 9, 3736–3742. [CrossRef]
38.   Idos, G.E.; Kwok, J.; Bonthala, N.; Kysh, L.; Gruber, S.B.; Qu, C. The Prognostic Implications of Tumor Infiltrating Lymphocytes in
      Colorectal Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 3360. [CrossRef]
39.   Sichien, D.; Lambrecht, B.N.; Guilliams, M.; Scott, C.L. Development of Conventional Dendritic Cells: From Common Bone
      Marrow Progenitors to Multiple Subsets in Peripheral Tissues. Mucosal Immunol. 2017, 10, 831–844. [CrossRef]
