Decision Tree Ensembles Utilizing Multivariate Splits Are
Effective at Investigating Beta-Diversity in Medically
Relevant 16S Amplicon Sequencing Data
Josip Rudar, Geoffrey Golding, Stefan Kremer, and Mehrdad Hajibabaei

Corresponding Authors: Josip Rudar and Mehrdad Hajibabaei,
University of Guelph

Review Timeline:                                                   Submission Date:                                   June 7, 2022
                                                                   Editorial Decision:                               June 29, 2022
                                                                   Revision Received:                           September 15, 2022
                                                                   Editorial Decision:                             October 7, 2022
                                                                   Revision Received:                             January 19, 2023
                                                                   Accepted:                                     February 11, 2023


Editor: Jan Claesen

Reviewer(s): The reviewers have opted to remain anonymous.

Transaction Report:
(Note: With the exception of the correction of typographical or spelling errors that could be a source of ambiguity, letters and
reports are not edited. The original formatting of letters and referee reports may not be reflected in this compilation.)

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1128/spectrum.02065-22
1st Editorial Decision                                                                                               June 29,
                                                                                                                     2022]
June 29, 2022

Dr. Josip Rudar
University of Guelph
Integrative Biology
Guelph, Ontario
Canada


Re: Spectrum02065-22 (Decision Tree Ensembles Utilizing Multivariate Splits Are Effective at Investigating Beta-Diversity in
Medically Relevant 16S Amplicon Sequencing Data)

Dear Dr. Josip Rudar:

Thanks for submitting your paper to Spectrum! Your manuscript has been evaluated by two independent Reviewers. Among the
comments raised, the Reviewers pointed out that it is not entirely clear how the method described in the paper compares to
existing methods and they provided suggestions to address this. I would be happy to consider a revised version of your
manuscript in which the Reviewer comments are addressed in a point-by-point fashion. I realize this might involve running some
additional data analyses, which could take longer than the standard allotted 60 days, and if you would like to request additional
time for resubmission that would be agreeable.

Thank you for submitting your manuscript to Microbiology Spectrum. When submitting the revised version of your paper, please
provide (1) point-by-point responses to the issues raised by the reviewers as file type "Response to Reviewers," not in your
cover letter, and (2) a PDF file that indicates the changes from the original submission (by highlighting or underlining the
changes) as file type "Marked Up Manuscript - For Review Only". Please use this link to submit your revised manuscript - we
strongly recommend that you submit your paper within the next 60 days or reach out to me. Detailed instructions on submitting
your revised paper are below.

Link Not Available

Below you will find instructions from the Microbiology Spectrum editorial office and comments generated during the review.

ASM policy requires that data be available to the public upon online posting of the article, so please verify all links to sequence
records, if present, and make sure that each number retrieves the full record of the data. If a new accession number is not linked
or a link is broken, provide production staff with the correct URL for the record. If the accession numbers for new data are not
publicly accessible before the expected online posting of the article, publication of your article may be delayed; please contact
the ASM production staff immediately with the expected release date.

The ASM Journals program strives for constant improvement in our submission and publication process. Please tell us how we
can improve your experience by taking this quick Author Survey.


Sincerely,

Jan Claesen

Editor, Microbiology Spectrum

Journals Department
American Society for Microbiology
1752 N St., NW
Washington, DC 20036
E-mail: spectrum@asmusa.org



Reviewer comments:

Reviewer #1 (Comments for the Author):

Rudar and colleagues describe the use of machine learning approaches to calculate and analyze beta-diversity metrics. There is
considerable interest currently in using machine learning approaches with microbiome data. Unfortunately, I found the writing
and description of methods too challenging to follow. Furthermore, although the authors were re-analyzing previously published
datasets, the new analysis is not at all aligned with the previous efforts, which made it difficult to compare the new results to the
old.

1. The justification for the two datasets the authors analyzed was not strong (L103). The Flynn dataset is quite small with fewer
than 20 subjects. As for the Forbes dataset, there are 5 conditions, but the number of subjects in each condition was between
19 and 23. I suspect there was signficant overfitting of their models, yet there does not appear to be any cross validation or
analysis to assess for overfitting or quality of the models. Also, a confounding issue for the Flynn dataset would be that the four
sites are not indpednent of each other within each subject. I'm surprised that the authors didn't select a larger dataset such as
the Baxter dataset that Schloss (corresponding author of the Flynn paper) has published numerous machine learning papers on
that the authors could use for comparison (doi: 10.1128/mbio.03161-21, 10.1128/mBio.00434-20, 10.1186/s13073-016-0290-3,
10.1186/s40168-017-0366-3, 10.1186/s40168-016-0205-y)

2. One of the authors' motivations is to identify interactions between taxa using beta diversity metrics. But that isn't what they're
designed to do. They're designed with measuring the dissimiarity between samples. Furthermore, I don't know how the authors
think they can claim evidence for 'interactions' between features when all they have is a snapshot of subjects. There's no time
series data here. Perhaps they're measuring co-occurrence or assocations, but definitely not interactions.

3. One of my struggles is trying to figure out is what the authors have found and how it's different from other methods. I would
encourage the authors to use non CLR transformed data with "traditional" metrics like Bray-Curtis to see if these newer
approaches gain anything over the simpler, traditional approaches. Furthermore, it would be nice to see a direct comparison -
with the same ASVs - between what they are doing and what traditional methods have found. The authors acknowledge that
data processing steps can have a significant impact on downstream steps and there's no consensus on things like ASVs or how
to deal with compositional data. However, the authors have doubled down on using ASVs and using CLR rather than using other
taxonomic levels that aren't so sparse or using traditional beta-diversity metrics like Bray-Curtis.

4. I found the manuscript was overloaded with Jargon and unsummarized data. For example on L107 the authors describe the
four sites from Flynn that they used as "proximal lumen (RS) and mucosa (RB), the distal lumen (LS) and mucosa (LB)". The
abbreviations have little connection to the site making it challenging for the reader to keep track of what is being compared.
Furthermore, in the main paper there are 5 dense tables and 7 multipanel figures. I feel like the authors are giving the reader the
data and asking the reader to draw conclusions. Finally, the machine learning methods descriptions is overly technical and I
suspect the typical Microbiology Spectrum Reader will not be able to understand what the authors are trying to say.

5. It appears to me that the mark of the best method was providing the highest R2 value in a PERMANOVA test. Surely this
could be spurious, right? A method can be overly optimistic and provide false positives. I suspect this might be the case if the
models are overfit. The authors need a more objective way to assess the performance of their approaches.

6. The authors used a centered-log-ratio (CLR) transformation (L150). To do this a pseudocount needs to be added to values to
avoid taking the logarithm of zero. What pseudocount was chosen and how did the choice of pseudocount affect the results?

7. I wonder whether the data were rarefied to a common number of sequences? Jaccard is highly susceptible to uneven
sampling efforts. I suspect Aitchison is as well.

8. The description of the sequence curation is confusing at L137. It reads as though samples with confidence scores below 80%
were removed from dataset. The Flynn dataset at least is a high quality dataset that likely has a very low sequencing error rate
(full 2-fold coverage of the V4 region). I'm not sure why the authors would chose to remove such sequences. I would be curious
what fraction of the sequences were removed.


Minor points...

L23. "16S rRNA data" / L103. "16S rRNA amplicon sequencing". Properly speaking the data analyzed were "16S rRNA gene"
sequence data. No rRNA data are presented and the authors did not amplify rRNA - rather they sequenced the rRNA genes.

L151. "compositional (24,28). independent." something needs to be fixed here



Reviewer #2 (Comments for the Author):

Rudar et al present a comparison of methods to differentiate community level differences in the microbiome. They applied a
tree-based algorithm (Landmark), and compared it to two supervised learning approaches, as well as Jaccard and Aitchison
distance, two commonly used distance metrics. The authors also compared the ability to two ordination techniques to visually
separate the data, applying PCoA and PCoA+UMAP to try and improve separation. They suggest that their tree-based algorithm
can best distinguish the biological groups of interest, and the dual ordination approach improves visual separation and
encourage the use of the algorithm.
The authors provide a github link to two scripts written in base python to replicate their work.

Strengths
1. The authors are exploring novel techniques address a common frustration in microbiome research, where often important
covariates only explain a small fraction of the overall variation in the microbial community. Similarly, the proposal of a secondary
UMAP projection to amplify effects in PCoA space has the potential to enhance understanding

2. Comparisons between different machine learning techniques demonstrate the appropriateness of the LandMARK to separate
the data

3. The use of real data in this simulation demonstrates this work is applicable at biologically relevant effect sizes and study sizes
seen in the actual literature rather than small, toy datasets.

Places for Improvement

1. The article needs to clearly identify (1) what LandMARK is and (2) cite the previous paper. It was not entirely clear that this
work built on a previously published algorithm nor what the abbreviation means when it appears

2. The article was submitted as a research article, but appears to present a new tool? algorithm? computational method?
I did find the code, but its poorly documented and would be difficult to adapt into a new analysis by anyone by the authors. If this
approach is intended for a wider audience (or even reproducibility beyond this single dataset), additional resources are needed.
These might take the form of better documented code (explain the steps and the motivation), a wrapper function that takes an
input table and framework and applies the appropriate transforms, a wrapper to perform the search space algorithm, and/or a
tutorial...
I don't even know how to construct the environment based on the current available documentation.

3. I'm not sure you can really call the Landmark ordination unsupervised, since you're still using a supervised feature-selection.
It seems like a circular process: you build this supervised classifier which selects features, convert it into an ordination and then
claim it outperforms entirely unsupervised ordination...
If this is the case, maybe an additional comparison with PL-SDA might be appropriate.

If I'm misunderstanding, then I think the authors have missed more recent literature addressing some of their critiques of classic
beta diversity metrics. For example, PCA on an ILR-transformed table (PhILR as an example) or DEICODE (a sparsity aware
modified Aitchison) might be more appropriate comparisons.

4. I think the argument in the discussion that a single metric has to capture every aspect of the data is misleading. There may be
a metric that best captures variation within a data set, but the claim of one true metric seems to dismiss a biological reality
where different ecological mechanisms underpin perturbations in communities. This is not to say LANDmark-based ordination is
not a useful tool, however, I think the discussion could and should be softened to allow room to test hypotheses around multiple
potential ecological processes

5. I know this is a big ask, and may be beyond the scope of reasonable re-analysis, however, if the claim is that decision tree-
based metrics better account for the correlated structure of the data, it seems simulated data with a known correlation structure
would be a better proof of this than an unsubstantiated claim.

Other Suggestions
1. The mixing and introduction of ASV/OTU seems like a bit of a red herring. My recommendation would be to describe
everything in the table as a "feature" since it could potentially be an ASV, OTU, species from metagenomic sequencing, or
genome. The method should ultimately be agnostic to the type of feature, it just wants features

2. Please cite your tools. I shouldn't have to look at your figures to know this was a python implementation or go through your
code to figure out the library defaults to know what was in your methods. This is especially important since the scipy Jaccard
implementation is slightly different than Jaccard implementations in R.
Also because citation is a very cheap way to keep the resources we all rely on going, since citation shows a compelling need to
funders for maintenance

3. Please check the text sizes on the final figures since most are difficult read at the current DPI. Also, if possible, please provide
in-figure legends
Staff Comments:

Preparing Revision Guidelines
To submit your modified manuscript, log onto the eJP submission site at https://spectrum.msubmit.net/cgi-bin/main.plex. Go to
Author Tasks and click the appropriate manuscript title to begin the revision process. The information that you entered when you
first submitted the paper will be displayed. Please update the information as necessary. Here are a few examples of required
updates that authors must address:

• Point-by-point responses to the issues raised by the reviewers in a file named "Response to Reviewers," NOT IN YOUR
COVER LETTER.
• Upload a compare copy of the manuscript (without figures) as a "Marked-Up Manuscript" file.
• Each figure must be uploaded as a separate file, and any multipanel figures must be assembled into one file.
• Manuscript: A .DOC version of the revised manuscript
• Figures: Editable, high-resolution, individual figure files are required at revision, TIFF or EPS files are preferred

For complete guidelines on revision requirements, please see the journal Submission and Review Process requirements at
https://journals.asm.org/journal/Spectrum/submission-review-process. Submissions of a paper that does not conform to
Microbiology Spectrum guidelines will delay acceptance of your manuscript. "

Please return the manuscript within 60 days; if you cannot complete the modification within this time period, please contact me. If
you do not wish to modify the manuscript and prefer to submit it to another journal, please notify me of your decision
immediately so that the manuscript may be formally withdrawn from consideration by Microbiology Spectrum.

If your manuscript is accepted for publication, you will be contacted separately about payment when the proofs are issued;
please follow the instructions in that e-mail. Arrangements for payment must be made before your article is published. For a
complete list of Publication Fees, including supplemental material costs, please visit ourwebsite.

Corresponding authors may join or renew ASM membership to obtain discounts on publication fees. Need to upgrade your
membership level? Please contact Customer Service at Service@asmusa.org.

Thank you for submitting your paper to Microbiology Spectrum.
Rudar et al present a comparison of methods to differentiate community level
differences in the microbiome. They applied a tree-based algorithm (Landmark), and
compared it to two supervised learning approaches, as well as Jaccard and Aitchison
distance, two commonly used distance metrics. The authors also compared the ability to
two ordination techniques to visually separate the data, applying PCoA and
PCoA+UMAP to try and improve separation. They suggest that their tree-based
algorithm can best distinguish the biological groups of interest, and the dual ordination
approach improves visual separation and encourage the use of the algorithm.
The authors provide a github link to two scripts written in base python to replicate their
work.

Strengths
   1. The authors are exploring novel techniques address a common frustration in
      microbiome research, where often important covariates only explain a small
      fraction of the overall variation in the microbial community. Similarly, the proposal
      of a secondary UMAP projection to amplify effects in PCoA space has the
      potential to enhance understanding

   2. Comparisons between different machine learning techniques demonstrate the
      appropriateness of the LandMARK to separate the data

   3. The use of real data in this simulation demonstrates this work is applicable at
      biologically relevant effect sizes and study sizes seen in the actual literature
      rather than small, toy datasets.

Places for Improvement

   1. The article needs to clearly identify (1) what LandMARK is and (2) cite the
      previous paper. It was not entirely clear that this work built on a previously
      published algorithm nor what the abbreviation means when it appears

   2. The article was submitted as a research article, but appears to present a new
      tool? algorithm? computational method?
      I did find the code, but its poorly documented and would be difficult to adapt into
      a new analysis by anyone by the authors. If this approach is intended for a wider
      audience (or even reproducibility beyond this single dataset), additional
      resources are needed. These might take the form of better documented code
      (explain the steps and the motivation), a wrapper function that takes an input
      table and framework and applies the appropriate transforms, a wrapper to
      perform the search space algorithm, and/or a tutorial…
      I don’t even know how to construct the environment based on the current
      available documentation.

   3. I’m not sure you can really call the Landmark ordination unsupervised, since
      you’re still using a supervised feature-selection. It seems like a circular process:
      you build this supervised classifier which selects features, convert it into an
      ordination and then claim it outperforms entirely unsupervised ordination…
      If this is the case, maybe an additional comparison with PL-SDA might be
      appropriate.

      If I’m misunderstanding, then I think the authors have missed more recent
      literature addressing some of their critiques of classic beta diversity metrics. For
      example, PCA on an ILR-transformed table (PhILR as an example) or DEICODE
      (a sparsity aware modified Aitchison) might be more appropriate comparisons.

   4. I think the argument in the discussion that a single metric has to capture every
      aspect of the data is misleading. There may be a metric that best captures
      variation within a data set, but the claim of one true metric seems to dismiss a
      biological reality where different ecological mechanisms underpin perturbations in
      communities. This is not to say LANDmark-based ordination is not a useful tool,
      however, I think the discussion could and should be softened to allow room to
      test hypotheses around multiple potential ecological processes

   5. I know this is a big ask, and may be beyond the scope of reasonable re-analysis,
      however, if the claim is that decision tree-based metrics better account for the
      correlated structure of the data, it seems simulated data with a known correlation
      structure would be a better proof of this than an unsubstantiated claim.

Other Suggestions/
   1. The mixing and introduction of ASV/OTU seems like a bit of a red herring. My
      recommendation would be to describe everything in the table as a “feature” since
      it could potentially be an ASV, OTU, species from metagenomic sequencing, or
      genome. The method should ultimately be agnostic to the type of feature, it just
      wants features

   2. Please cite your tools. I shouldn’t have to look at your figures to know this was a
      python implementation or go through your code to figure out the library defaults
      to know what was in your methods. This is especially important since the scipy
      Jaccard implementation is slightly different than Jaccard implementations in R.
      Also because citation is a very cheap way to keep the resources we all rely on
      going, since citation shows a compelling need to funders for maintenance

   3. Please check the text sizes on the final figures since most are difficult read at the
      current DPI. Also, if possible, please provide in-figure legends
                                    Response to Reviewers

1. The justification for the two datasets the authors analyzed was not strong (L103).
   The Flynn dataset is quite small with fewer than 20 subjects. As for the Forbes
   dataset, there are 5 conditions, but the number of subjects in each condition was
   between 19 and 23. I suspect there was signficant overfitting of their models, yet
   there does not appear to be any cross validation or analysis to assess for overfitting
   or quality of the models. Also, a confounding issue for the Flynn dataset would be
   that the four sites are not indpednent of each other within each subject. I'm
   surprised that the authors didn't select a larger dataset such as the Baxter dataset
   that Schloss (corresponding author of the Flynn paper) has published numerous
   machine learning papers on that the authors could use for comparison (doi:
   10.1128/mbio.03161-21, 10.1128/mBio.00434-20, 10.1186/s13073-016-0290-3,
   10.1186/s40168-017-0366-3, 10.1186/s40168-016-0205-y)

   Thank you for this comment. In our initial manuscript, as you pointed out in your third
   and fourth comments, there was much to improve concerning clarity. The goal of this
   manuscript was to propose that decision tree ensemble classifiers (such as Extra Trees
   and LANDMark) could be used to investigate beta-diversity while concurrently
   identifying the ASVs (or OTUs, etc) that play a role in determining the location of
   samples in the projected space1–4. To this end, we made large modifications to the
   manuscript. Furthermore, we focused our results on two case studies from these datasets
   to test how well these approaches can visualize and identify differences between the
   proximal lumen and mucosa of the human colon and between Crohn’s Disease patients
   and healthy controls. 5-Fold Stratified Cross-Validation with 3 repeats was used to create
   different training and testing datasets. The balanced accuracy score was then calculated
   on the withheld data. In addition, we compared these results to those produced using a
   random classifier. Finally, while we would have liked to test an additional larger dataset,
   we did not have the time as we had to choose between this and the inclusion of positive
   and negative controls. We chose the latter since these can act as a rough proxy since a
   real dataset (the keyboard dataset) is used to create the positive controls. This simulation
   was created using the procedure and code from Martino et al. (2019)5.

   We would also like to address your comment about overfitting in further detail. While
   some overfitting is likely to occur, we do not believe this is a problem in this
   experimental setup since we observed high balanced accuracy scores and these scores
   (Figure 3) were always more likely to be better than those observed when using a random
   classifier. Furthermore, randomization is a form of regularization when used with
   decision tree ensembles, which hopefully addresses your concern6. Finally, it is well
   known that individual decision trees tend to overfit the data and this often leads to poor
   generalization performance when these are used to predict class labels on unseen data
   points. However, if extensive randomization is used throughout the learning process to
   create a diverse assembly of individual trees, it becomes more likely that the
   classification errors made by each tree are uncorrelated3,7,8. Averaging the results of all
the trees will then result in an improvement in generalization performance, even if using
individual models which overfit.

2. One of the authors' motivations is to identify interactions between taxa using beta
diversity metrics. But that isn't what they're designed to do. They're designed with
measuring the dissimiarity between samples. Furthermore, I don't know how the
authors think they can claim evidence for 'interactions' between features when all
they have is a snapshot of subjects. There's no time series data here. Perhaps they're
measuring co-occurrence or assocations, but definitely not interactions.

Thank you for your comment. We believe there is a misunderstanding in what we are
trying to accomplish in this analysis. You are correct in what we are measuring using
tree-based dissimilarities: these are dependencies in the co-occurrence and possibly the
abundance of ASVs. We have corrected the manuscript to reflect this and now explicitly
state that tree-based dissimilarities can identify these dependencies during training. A
significant number of changes have been made throughout the manuscript to improve
readability and reader understanding of the terms used. Examples of these changes can be
found on lines 21, 44, 93, 481-483.

3. One of my struggles is trying to figure out is what the authors have found and
how it's different from other methods. I would encourage the authors to use non
CLR transformed data with "traditional" metrics like Bray-Curtis to see if these
newer approaches gain anything over the simpler, traditional approaches.
Furthermore, it would be nice to see a direct comparison - with the same ASVs -
between what they are doing and what traditional methods have found. The authors
acknowledge that data processing steps can have a significant impact on
downstream steps and there's no consensus on things like ASVs or how to deal with
compositional data. However, the authors have doubled down on using ASVs and
using CLR rather than using other taxonomic levels that aren't so sparse or using
traditional beta-diversity metrics like Bray-Curtis.

Thank you for this comment. We chose to primarily focus on the two commonly used
compositional approaches and the presence-absence transformation in this manuscript.
The CLR (and now Robust CLR) transformations were used since these are increasingly
used to address the problems associated with differences in read counts between taxa in
each sample. While we agree that the use of more traditional metrics (like Bray-Curtis)
has a place, during planning and testing we felt as though the inclusion of these metrics
and other available transformations (CSS9, GMPR10, ILR11) would take away from the
main message of the manuscript: dissimilarities learned by tree-based ensembles can be
used to investigate beta-diversity and identify differences in the composition of
ecological and microbial communities. We did include this as a limitation in our
concluding statement, however, while also providing a rationale for why and how
traditional approaches can be used (speed, exploratory analysis). This change can be
found in lines 522 to 528.

4. I found the manuscript was overloaded with Jargon and unsummarized data. For
example on L107 the authors describe the four sites from Flynn that they used as
"proximal lumen (RS) and mucosa (RB), the distal lumen (LS) and mucosa (LB)".
The abbreviations have little connection to the site making it challenging for the
reader to keep track of what is being compared. Furthermore, in the main paper
there are 5 dense tables and 7 multipanel figures. I feel like the authors are giving
the reader the data and asking the reader to draw conclusions. Finally, the machine
learning methods descriptions is overly technical and I suspect the typical
Microbiology Spectrum Reader will not be able to understand what the authors are
trying to say.

We agree with your comment and have significantly reduced the complexity of the
manuscript. Since the main goal of this work was to investigate learned dissimilarities
and present a proof-of-concept approach on how to use these to investigate beta-diversity,
we focused our manuscript on two case studies: separating samples from the proximal
lumen and mucosa and the Crohn’s disease dataset. We also divided and re-wrote more
complex sections of the methods in an attempt to reduce the amount of jargon. New
figures and tables were generated which, hopefully, are better at conveying the message.
Finally, we focused the manuscript on the main idea: a non-parametric approach to
identify predictive ASVs and investigate community composition.

5. It appears to me that the mark of the best method was providing the highest R2
value in a PERMANOVA test. Surely this could be spurious, right? A method can
be overly optimistic and provide false positives. I suspect this might be the case if the
models are overfit. The authors need a more objective way to assess the
performance of their approaches.

We have taken the approach used in Martino et al. (2019)5. The PerMANOVA12 F-
statistic was used to quantify the separation between groups for each transform and
projection method in each case study (Figure 2). In addition, we tested if the
configuration of samples between and within each of these projections could be similarly
interpreted using the PROTEST procedure13 (Figure 1). We also tested if supervised
models trained on the full and projected datasets could accurately predict the class label
of withheld samples using 5-Fold Stratified Cross-Validation with 3 repeats (Figure 3 and
5). We hope that these changes to the manuscript will result in a more objective way to
measure the performance of our approach.

6. The authors used a centered-log-ratio (CLR) transformation (L150). To do this a
pseudocount needs to be added to values to avoid taking the logarithm of zero. What
pseudocount was chosen and how did the choice of pseudocount affect the results?
Thank you for the comment. You are correct in that a pseudo-count was added. This was
done using the multiplicative replacement procedure14. Since this is done automatically
and is included in commonly used packages and algorithms5,15, we did not feel it was
necessary to address the effect of the pseudo-count at this time.

7. I wonder whether the data were rarefied to a common number of sequences?
Jaccard is highly susceptible to uneven sampling efforts. I suspect Aitchison is as
well.

Thank you for this comment. We did not rarefy the original data. Upon further
consideration, we implemented this procedure and normalized each library such that the
size was equal to the 15th percentile of all reads16,17. This was only done for presence-
absence data. Our methods now reflect these changes.

8. The description of the sequence curation is confusing at L137. It reads as though
samples with confidence scores below 80% were removed from dataset. The Flynn
dataset at least is a high quality dataset that likely has a very low sequencing error
rate (full 2-fold coverage of the V4 region). I'm not sure why the authors would
chose to remove such sequences. I would be curious what fraction of the sequences
were removed.

Thank you for this comment. The ASVs were originally removed since the confidence in
their assignment was below 80%. Originally, we only wanted to analyze ASVs which
could be confidently assigned to a particular genus. However, upon further consideration,
we re-ran the analysis with these ASVs included. Our methods section has been changed
to reflect your concern.

Reviewer #2 (Comments for the Author):

Rudar et al present a comparison of methods to differentiate community level
differences in the microbiome. They applied a tree-based algorithm (Landmark),
and compared it to two supervised learning approaches, as well as Jaccard and
Aitchison distance, two commonly used distance metrics. The authors also
compared the ability to two ordination techniques to visually separate the data,
applying PCoA and PCoA+UMAP to try and improve separation. They suggest that
their tree-based algorithm can best distinguish the biological groups of interest, and
the dual ordination approach improves visual separation and encourage the use of
the algorithm.
The authors provide a github link to two scripts written in base python to replicate
their work.

Strengths
1. The authors are exploring novel techniques address a common frustration in
microbiome research, where often important covariates only explain a small
fraction of the overall variation in the microbial community. Similarly, the proposal
of a secondary UMAP projection to amplify effects in PCoA space has the potential
to enhance understanding

2. Comparisons between different machine learning techniques demonstrate the
appropriateness of the LandMARK to separate the data

3. The use of real data in this simulation demonstrates this work is applicable at
biologically relevant effect sizes and study sizes seen in the actual literature rather
than small, toy datasets.

Thank you for the positive comments and suggestions. We hope that our improvements to
the manuscript further clarify these strengths.

Places for Improvement

1. The article needs to clearly identify (1) what LandMARK is and (2) cite the
previous paper. It was not entirely clear that this work built on a previously
published algorithm nor what the abbreviation means when it appears

Thank you for this comment. We have modified our introduction to reflect this comment
(see Lines 112 – 117)

2. The article was submitted as a research article, but appears to present a new tool?
algorithm? computational method?
I did find the code, but its poorly documented and would be difficult to adapt into a
new analysis by anyone by the authors. If this approach is intended for a wider
audience (or even reproducibility beyond this single dataset), additional resources
are needed. These might take the form of better documented code (explain the steps
and the motivation), a wrapper function that takes an input table and framework
and applies the appropriate transforms, a wrapper to perform the search space
algorithm, and/or a tutorial...
I don't even know how to construct the environment based on the current available
documentation.

Thank you for this comment. To address this concern, we have written a Python
Notebook and provided better documentation on the code. In addition, we provided a
wrapper, TreeOrdination, which will be available shortly at
https://github.com/jrudar/TreeOrdination. A short tutorial on its use will be provided
shortly after the submission of these revisions. Finally, we added which tools were used
and their version numbers into the appropriate methods sections.
3. I'm not sure you can really call the Landmark ordination unsupervised, since
you're still using a supervised feature-selection. It seems like a circular process: you
build this supervised classifier which selects features, convert it into an ordination
and then claim it outperforms entirely unsupervised ordination...
If this is the case, maybe an additional comparison with PL-SDA might be
appropriate.

Thank you for this comment. You are correct that LANDMark (and indeed most
decision-tree ensembles) are supervised classifiers. However, they can be used in an
“unsupervised” sense if one changes what the classifier is attempting to classify. In this
manuscript, and in other research related to this procedure, the classifier does not make
use of any of the original class labels and is only tasked to distinguish between real data
and randomized data1,2,18,19. The original data is then passed through the trained model to
create an embedding or similarity matrix. To address your comment regarding the
circular process, we created and tested a workflow that can be used to create the
ordination in this manner. This workflow begins by learning N embeddings and then
concatenating them. The concatenated vector is then used to train an Extra Trees
classifier to predict the original class labels. In addition, a UMAP projection of the
concatenated vector is created and the major axes of variation in this projection are
summarized using PCA. We then use SAGE20 and Shapley scores21,22 to identify the
ASVs strongly impact the location of each sample in the projected space and quantify
them. An example of these results can be found in Figures 4 – 7.

If I'm misunderstanding, then I think the authors have missed more recent
literature addressing some of their critiques of classic beta diversity metrics. For
example, PCA on an ILR-transformed table (PhILR as an example) or DEICODE
(a sparsity aware modified Aitchison) might be more appropriate comparisons.

Thank you for your comment. We have included an additional analysis using sparsity-
aware robust CLR transformation used by DEICODE. Unfortunately, we did not have
time to include an analysis of the ILR transformation. However, we did not that exploring
this approach is important in our concluding statement (Lines 526-528). The concluding
statement also addresses a limitation in our study. Specifically, since this work represents
a proof-of-concept we did not exhaustively test every transformation and projection
method. However, we do believe that additional work is needed so that a better
understanding of how machine learning can be used to investigate community
composition using different transformations is needed.

4. I think the argument in the discussion that a single metric has to capture every
aspect of the data is misleading. There may be a metric that best captures variation
within a data set, but the claim of one true metric seems to dismiss a biological
reality where different ecological mechanisms underpin perturbations in
communities. This is not to say LANDmark-based ordination is not a useful tool,
however, I think the discussion could and should be softened to allow room to test
hypotheses around multiple potential ecological processes

We added an additional discussion addressing that the choice in metric can have strengths
and weaknesses depending on the dataset and what is being analyzed. We also suggested
that this discussion is not settled and there is no consensus on which combination of
approaches will be best since this is likely to be dataset-dependent (first paragraph of our
discussion). In the concluding statement we also suggest that some metrics may be useful
for exploratory analysis and, if projections account for a large fraction of the explained
variance, there may be little value that is added using learned dissimilarities due to their
additional complexity. We hope that these additional discussion points satisfy your
concerns and we thank you for the comment.

5. I know this is a big ask, and may be beyond the scope of reasonable re-analysis,
however, if the claim is that decision tree-based metrics better account for the
correlated structure of the data, it seems simulated data with a known correlation
structure would be a better proof of this than an unsubstantiated claim.

We included a positive and negative control using the procedure described in Martino et
al. (2019)5.

Other Suggestions
1. The mixing and introduction of ASV/OTU seems like a bit of a red herring. My
recommendation would be to describe everything in the table as a "feature" since it
could potentially be an ASV, OTU, species from metagenomic sequencing, or
genome. The method should ultimately be agnostic to the type of feature, it just
wants features

We made major modifications in the language throughout the manuscript to better reflect
that ASVs are features. We hope that these changes improve the clarity of the manuscript
and convey to others that this approach can be agnostic to the type of features.

2. Please cite your tools. I shouldn't have to look at your figures to know this was a
python implementation or go through your code to figure out the library defaults to
know what was in your methods. This is especially important since the scipy
Jaccard implementation is slightly different than Jaccard implementations in R.
Also because citation is a very cheap way to keep the resources we all rely on going,
since citation shows a compelling need to funders for maintenance

Thank you for this comment. We re-wrote the methods section and did a better job at
describing which packages were used and the versions of the packages used.
       3. Please check the text sizes on the final figures since most are difficult read at the
       current DPI. Also, if possible, please provide in-figure legends

       New figures were generated. We hope that these are clearer and more informative than
       previously used ones.


References
1. Alhusain, L. & Hafez, A. M. Cluster ensemble based on Random Forests for genetic data.

   BioData Mining 10, 37 (2017).

2. Rhodes, J. S., Cutler, A. & Moon, K. R. Geometry- and Accuracy-Preserving Random Forest

   Proximities. (2022) doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2201.12682.

3. Rudar, J., Porter, T. M., Wright, M., Golding, G. B. & Hajibabaei, M. LANDMark: An

   ensemble approach to the supervised selection of biomarkers in high-throughput sequencing

   data. BMC Bioinformatics 23, 110 (2022).

4. Breiman, L. Random Forests. Machine Learning 45, 5–32 (2001).

5. Martino, C. et al. A Novel Sparse Compositional Technique Reveals Microbial

   Perturbations. mSystems 4, (2019).

6. Mentch, L. & Zhou, S. Randomization as Regularization: A Degrees of Freedom

   Explanation for Random Forest Success. Journal of Machine Learning Research 21, 171:1-

   171:36 (2020).

7. Kuncheva, L. A Bound on Kappa-Error Diagrams for Analysis of Classifier Ensembles.

   IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 25, 494–501 (2013).

8. Kuncheva, L. I. & Rodriguez, J. J. Classifier ensembles with a random linear oracle. IEEE

   Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 19, 500–508 (2007).

9. Paulson, J. N., Stine, O. C., Bravo, H. C. & M, P. Robust methods for differential abundance

   analysis in marker gene surveys. Nature Methods 10, 1200–1202 (2013).
10. Chen, L. et al. GMPR: A robust normalization method for zero-inflated count data with

    application to microbiome sequencing data. PeerJ 6, e4600 (2018).

11. Silverman, J. D., Washburne, A. D., S, M. & David, L. A. A phylogenetic transform

    enhances analysis of compositional microbiota data. eLife 6, 21887 (2017).

12. Anderson, M. J. & Walsh, D. C. I. PERMANOVA, ANOSIM, and the Mantel test in the face

    of heterogeneous dispersions: What null hypothesis are you testing? Ecological Monographs

    83, 557–574 (2013).

13. Jackson, D. A. PROTEST: A PROcrustean Randomization TEST of community

    environment concordance. Écoscience 2, 297–303 (1995).

14. Martín-Fernández, J. A., Barceló-Vidal, C. & Pawlowsky-Glahn, V. Dealing with Zeros and

    Missing Values in Compositional Data Sets Using Nonparametric Imputation. Mathematical

    Geology 35, 253–278 (2003).

15. team, T. scikit-bio development. scikit-bio: A Bioinformatics Library for Data Scientists,

    Students, and Developers. (2022).

16. McMurdie, P. J. & Holmes, S. Waste Not, Want Not: Why Rarefying Microbiome Data Is

    Inadmissible. PLoS Computational Biology 10, 1003531 (2014).

17. Weiss, S. et al. Normalization and microbial differential abundance strategies depend upon

    data characteristics. Microbiome 5, (2017).

18. Dalleau, K., Couceiro, M. & Smail-Tabbone, M. Unsupervised Extremely Randomized

    Trees. in Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (eds. Phung, D. et al.) 478–

    489 (Springer International Publishing, 2018).
19. Bernard, S., Cao, H., Sabourin, R. & Heutte, L. Random Forest for Dissimilarity-based

   Multi-view Learning. in Handbook of Pattern Recognition and Computer Vision 119–138

   (WORLD SCIENTIFIC, 2020). doi:10.1142/9789811211072_0007.

20. Covert, I. C., Lundberg, S. & Lee, S.-I. Understanding Global Feature Contributions with

   Additive Importance Measures. in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on

   Neural Information Processing Systems (Curran Associates Inc., 2020).

21. Lundberg, S. M. et al. From local explanations to global understanding with explainable AI

   for trees. Nat Mach Intell 2, 56–67 (2020).

22. Lundberg, S. M. & Lee, S. A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predictions. in 31st

   Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017 (2017).
1st Revision - Editorial Decision                                                                                   October 7,
                                                                                                                    2022
October 7, 2022

Dr. Josip Rudar
University of Guelph
Integrative Biology
Guelph, Ontario
Canada


Re: Spectrum02065-22R1 (Decision Tree Ensembles Utilizing Multivariate Splits Are Effective at Investigating Beta-Diversity in
Medically Relevant 16S Amplicon Sequencing Data)

Dear Dr. Josip Rudar:

I sent your manuscript back to the original Reviewers for evaluation and I agree with them that their comments from the first
submission have not been fully addressed. Could you please address all comments from both the previous and current
evaluation and provide a marked-up manuscript that allows the Reviewers and me to follow the edits made. I'm sorry, but unless
these problems are fully addressed, we will have to reject your paper.

Thank you for submitting your manuscript to Microbiology Spectrum. When submitting the revised version of your paper, please
provide (1) point-by-point responses to the issues raised by the reviewers as file type "Response to Reviewers," not in your
cover letter, and (2) a PDF file that indicates the changes from the original submission (by highlighting or underlining the
changes) as file type "Marked Up Manuscript - For Review Only". Please use this link to submit your revised manuscript - we
strongly recommend that you submit your paper within the next 60 days or reach out to me. Detailed instructions on submitting
your revised paper are below.

Link Not Available

Below you will find instructions from the Microbiology Spectrum editorial office and comments generated during the review.

ASM policy requires that data be available to the public upon online posting of the article, so please verify all links to sequence
records, if present, and make sure that each number retrieves the full record of the data. If a new accession number is not linked
or a link is broken, provide production staff with the correct URL for the record. If the accession numbers for new data are not
publicly accessible before the expected online posting of the article, publication of your article may be delayed; please contact
the ASM production staff immediately with the expected release date.

The ASM Journals program strives for constant improvement in our submission and publication process. Please tell us how we
can improve your experience by taking this quick Author Survey.


Sincerely,

Jan Claesen

Editor, Microbiology Spectrum

Journals Department
American Society for Microbiology
1752 N St., NW
Washington, DC 20036
E-mail: spectrum@asmusa.org



Reviewer comments:

Reviewer #1 (Comments for the Author):

# Review

I appreciate the authors' attempts to respond to my comments and those of the other reviewer. On the whole, I do not feel that
the authors were fully responsive to our comments.
This is exemplified by the fact that they did not submit a marked up version of the manuscript. Rather, their marked up
manuscript is a bunch of comments point to where the reviewers made comments. It is not possible to look at the marked up
version of the manuscript and see what has changed.

Furthermore, in their response to the reviews, the authors mentioned several times that there wasn't enough time to complete an
analysis. Science is not a timed trial. Work needs to be done to couch the analysis in the proper context. I am still unclear why
the authors chose the relatively small Flynn dataset with large effect size rather than a larger, more realistic dataset with a more
modest effect size that has alreadly been studied by machine learning approaches (e.g. the Baxter dataset I mentioned). Also,
just because two reviewers and an editor signed off on an earlier manuscript does not exempt it from further scrutiny. The effect
of adding a pseudocount is potentially problematic and could inflate or deflate the ability to detect real differences.

Rather than brushing off my comments, the authors need to test for overfitting the authors need to split the data to establish a
training and testing set and then repeat the split a large number of times (e.g. 100 times) to assess for performance and
overfitting between the training and testing datasets.

The manuscript is jargon laden and will be impossible for most microbiologists to make sense of. If the authors want
microbiologists to use this work in their own, then the authors need to make it much more accessible.

The data are still poorly summarized and presented in the 3 large tables and 7 large figures.


Reviewer #2 (Comments for the Author):

Thank you to the authors for their substantial revisions and clarifications around versions. However, I have some remaining
concerns.

In my original revision in point 2, I raised the issue of a lack of reproducibility and the TreeOrdination github repo was offered as
a solution. Since this paper is supposed to sway the reader to use the new method, it seemed critical to know it actually worked
and if I could apply the method using one of my favorite datasets.
I was unable to install the Landmark package in a clean python 3.10 conda environment. (I got an error message that scikit-learn
version 1.1.4 was required, and the closest available version was 1.1.2.) I cannot reasonably review a method that I can't run.
The notebooks that were provided with this manuscript are quite dense and poorly documented, even for people familiar with
python. The tutorial provides very little information about what format the data needs to be in or any pre-processing steps
required. I anticipate that even if I could get the package installed, it would be a challenge to coerce the example data on my
computer into a format compatible with the tool provided.
I would highly recommend inviting a student, bioinformatician, or biostatistican to collaborate and provide a review for the
documentation and tool. They should be able to install the libraries, run the tutorial code, and interpret the results without
needing to ask the original team questions. You might also discuss with them how likely they would be to use your current
wrapper version and how it would integrate with their current workflows.

I also don't feel you've satisfied issues around jargon that the other reviewer and I raised. "Hot embedding" (lines 229-231) is
unlikely to be familiar to readers of this journal, could you clarify this term? The SAGE/Shipley methods used for identifying key
features is also not well described. Since these were first published within the last 5 years, it's possible that even experts in
feature selection may not be familiar with these methods.
In addition, given the move to DEICODE and the focus on the rPCA as a point of comparison, it seems like a natural comparison
should have been feature loadings in that space.

In the response to reviewers document, it was mentioned that this is a "proof of concept", and therefore did not represent an
exhaustive test. Based on that, the concluding statement about other metrics being more appropriate still seems very bold.


Additional remaining issues:
• The scikit libraries are canonically lowercased. (scikit-learn and scikit-bio).
• The text in several figures it still too small to read at scale in what will probably be the displayed figure. This is a problem in
figure S1, figure 5, and several others.
• You might consider long-transforming p-values when displaying them in boxplots, or possibly presenting them as a swarm plot.
• Permutative p-values should always be reported with the number of permutations




Staff Comments:
Preparing Revision Guidelines
To submit your modified manuscript, log onto the eJP submission site at https://spectrum.msubmit.net/cgi-bin/main.plex. Go to
Author Tasks and click the appropriate manuscript title to begin the revision process. The information that you entered when you
first submitted the paper will be displayed. Please update the information as necessary. Here are a few examples of required
updates that authors must address:

• Point-by-point responses to the issues raised by the reviewers in a file named "Response to Reviewers," NOT IN YOUR
COVER LETTER.
• Upload a compare copy of the manuscript (without figures) as a "Marked-Up Manuscript" file.
• Each figure must be uploaded as a separate file, and any multipanel figures must be assembled into one file.
• Manuscript: A .DOC version of the revised manuscript
• Figures: Editable, high-resolution, individual figure files are required at revision, TIFF or EPS files are preferred

For complete guidelines on revision requirements, please see the journal Submission and Review Process requirements at
https://journals.asm.org/journal/Spectrum/submission-review-process. Submissions of a paper that does not conform to
Microbiology Spectrum guidelines will delay acceptance of your manuscript. "

Please return the manuscript within 60 days; if you cannot complete the modification within this time period, please contact me. If
you do not wish to modify the manuscript and prefer to submit it to another journal, please notify me of your decision
immediately so that the manuscript may be formally withdrawn from consideration by Microbiology Spectrum.

If your manuscript is accepted for publication, you will be contacted separately about payment when the proofs are issued;
please follow the instructions in that e-mail. Arrangements for payment must be made before your article is published. For a
complete list of Publication Fees, including supplemental material costs, please visit ourwebsite.

Corresponding authors may join or renew ASM membership to obtain discounts on publication fees. Need to upgrade your
membership level? Please contact Customer Service at Service@asmusa.org.

Thank you for submitting your paper to Microbiology Spectrum.
                                      Response to Reviewers
1. The justification for the two datasets the authors analyzed was not strong (L103). The Flynn
   dataset is quite small with fewer than 20 subjects. As for the Forbes dataset, there are 5
   conditions, but the number of subjects in each condition was between 19 and 23. I suspect
   there was signficant overfitting of their models, yet there does not appear to be any cross
   validation or analysis to assess for overfitting or quality of the models. Also, a confounding
   issue for the Flynn dataset would be that the four sites are not indpednent of each other
   within each subject. I'm surprised that the authors didn't select a larger dataset such as the
   Baxter dataset that Schloss (corresponding author of the Flynn paper) has published
   numerous machine learning papers on that the authors could use for comparison (doi:
   10.1128/mbio.03161-21, 10.1128/mBio.00434-20, 10.1186/s13073-016-0290-3,
   10.1186/s40168-017-0366-3, 10.1186/s40168-016-0205-y)

   Thank you for this comment. In response to your comment we removed our analysis of the Flynn
   dataset and included an analysis of the Baxter dataset. We also highlighted why the analysis of
   these datasets is important (Lines 267-290). Before addressing this comment more directly, we
   would like to convey that a detailed analysis of these datasets is outside the scope of this study
   since the aim of our work is to show that metric learning can be used to generate better
   ordinations. We also intended to demonstrate that combining metric learning with modern model
   introspection algorithms can unify the analysis of community composition by identifying features
   (such as ASVs, OTUs, etc) which are associated with the overall variation in ordination and
   features which impact the placement of individual samples in the ordination. Examples of such
   analyses can be found in Figures 11 to 14. We also agree that overfitting is likely to be a problem
   in most machine learning analysis and that proper cross-validation is necessary to ensure that
   predictive models generalize well. To this end we clearly stated where cross-validation was added
   to our analysis (Lines 575-577, 592-593, 611-613, and Figures 1, 2, and 3 as examples of edits we
   made to improve clarity about how data was generated). To further elaborate on our use of cross-
   validation, we used five-fold stratified cross-validation with five repeats to test our models since
   we felt that 100 folds on these datasets would be excessive given their size. Although we chose
   not to use 100 folds we did address additional potential issues that could lead to overly optimistic
   models. For example, we took extra caution to ensure that any transformation applied to the
   training set would also be applied to the test set (examples can be found on Lines 510-512, 577-
   578). Furthermore, we did not test generalization performance using PCoA and RPCA
   transformed data since this would require us to project the entire dataset before splitting it into
   training and testing data. As we have discussed in the manuscript (Lines 761-763, 1312-1320)
   these methods incorporate information about the test data when optimizing the loss and therefore
   this should be avoided to prevent overly optimistic results. Finally, we included tests using a
   random classifier to ensure that the generalization performance of models in the Baxter dataset
   (measured using balanced accuracy) was always better than this baseline (Figure 6 and 8).

   Finally, we would like to clarify how overfitting is addressed in TreeOrdination, LANDMark, and
   Random Forests/Extremely Randomized Trees. Recent work has demonstrated that
   randomization in the selection of features can be considered a form of regularization when used
   with decision tree ensembles1. In these models, features which are not selected at nodes are
   effectively zeroed-out. In LANDMark, this is taken a step further and linear models are L1 and
   L2 regularized while neural network models (although not used here) are regularized using
dropout. Nodes in LANDMark are usually trained on a bootstrapped selection of samples and are
therefore trained using missing information2. Due to the extensive randomization that is used
throughout the learning process, a diverse assembly of individual trees is created and it becomes
more likely that the classification errors made by each tree are uncorrelated2–4. For these reasons
we are confident that LANDMark and TreeOrdination models do not severely overfit and this is
supported by our results (See Figures 2, 3, 5, 6, and 7).

2. One of the authors' motivations is to identify interactions between taxa using beta
diversity metrics. But that isn't what they're designed to do. They're designed with
measuring the dissimiarity between samples. Furthermore, I don't know how the authors
think they can claim evidence for 'interactions' between features when all they have is a
snapshot of subjects. There's no time series data here. Perhaps they're measuring co-
occurrence or assocations, but definitely not interactions.

Thank you for your comment. We believe there is a misunderstanding in what we are trying to
accomplish in this analysis. When using tree-based dissimilarities we are potentially modelling
dependencies in the co-occurrence and possibly the abundance of ASVs (or any other set of
features used to train the model). We have corrected the manuscript to reflect this and now
explicitly state that tree-based dissimilarities can potentially identify these dependencies during
training. Examples of these changes can be found on Lines 111-113, 119-121, 1110-1112, 1176-
1178.

3. One of my struggles is trying to figure out is what the authors have found and how it's
different from other methods. I would encourage the authors to use non CLR transformed
data with "traditional" metrics like Bray-Curtis to see if these newer approaches gain
anything over the simpler, traditional approaches. Furthermore, it would be nice to see a
direct comparison - with the same ASVs - between what they are doing and what traditional
methods have found. The authors acknowledge that data processing steps can have a
significant impact on downstream steps and there's no consensus on things like ASVs or
how to deal with compositional data. However, the authors have doubled down on using
ASVs and using CLR rather than using other taxonomic levels that aren't so sparse or using
traditional beta-diversity metrics like Bray-Curtis.

Thank you for this comment. In our latest revision we have included the Bray-Curtis measure
and an analysis using proportions (Lines 329-338, Figures 1-5). We also addressed important
limitations of the Robust CLR and PCoA ordinations. Using these can result in data leakage
(Lines 751-755, 1142-1150). To address this issue we avoided using ordinations created using
PCoA and RPCA to train machine learning models and instead used data transformed into
proportions as input into UMAP with the metric parameter set to “braycurtis”. This did result in
informative ordinations in the Crohn’s Disease case study but the separation between groups in
these ordinations (measured using the F-statistic) was smaller than with CLR and presence-
absence transformed data (Figure 4). We also added lines 1196-1199, 1456-1460, 1470-1476 to
address potential limitations of this work and future directions. We hope that this additional
analysis helps alleviate the reviewers concern.

Finally, we would like to address your comment over the novelty of this work. We want to
emphasize that the approaches described here (LANDMark and TreeOrdination) are general
purpose algorithms that can be applied to any dataset. Using ASVs and the transformations here
just serve as a way to provide consistent data to train the algorithms. So while we agree with your
comment that there is no consensus on the use of ASVs or how to deal with compositional data,
adding experiments such as these would take away from the main message of this work: 1) metric
learning can be used to investigate community differences in complex ecological datasets and 2)
metric learning and model introspection methods can be used to effectively identify which
features are associated with variation in ordinations at both a global and local scale. This allows a
single model, such as TreeOrdination, to be used to not only model beta-diveristy but also
understand how differences in the abundance or presence of organisms influences the position of
samples in these spaces (Figure 10-13 are good examples of this). Finally, unlike PCoA and
UMAP, a dissimilarity which is learned is less likely to be impacted by the assumptions of
commonly used dissimilarity and distance measures 5–7.

4. I found the manuscript was overloaded with Jargon and unsummarized data. For
example on L107 the authors describe the four sites from Flynn that they used as "proximal
lumen (RS) and mucosa (RB), the distal lumen (LS) and mucosa (LB)". The abbreviations
have little connection to the site making it challenging for the reader to keep track of what
is being compared. Furthermore, in the main paper there are 5 dense tables and 7
multipanel figures. I feel like the authors are giving the reader the data and asking the
reader to draw conclusions. Finally, the machine learning methods descriptions is overly
technical and I suspect the typical Microbiology Spectrum Reader will not be able to
understand what the authors are trying to say.

We agree with your comment and have significantly reduced the complexity of the manuscript.
We have extensively re-written large portions of the manuscript to reduce the amount of field-
specific jargon. We have also removed comparisons with other classifiers so that the analysis is as
straightforward as possible to the reader. We have removed many of the dense tables and
multipanel figures and we hope that the new figures and their captions capture the main idea of
each figure and study more clearly.

5. It appears to me that the mark of the best method was providing the highest R2 value in a
PERMANOVA test. Surely this could be spurious, right? A method can be overly optimistic
and provide false positives. I suspect this might be the case if the models are overfit. The
authors need a more objective way to assess the performance of their approaches.

We have taken the approach used in Martino et al. (2019)8. The PerMANOVA9 F-statistic was
used to quantify the separation between groups for each transform and projection method in each
case study (Figure 1 and 4). In addition, we provide the distribution of p-values for the synthetic
tests and Crohn’s Disease case study: Lines 611-613 and Figure 4. We also provide cross-
validated balanced accuracy scores for these tests (Figure 2, 3, and 5) and for the Baxter dataset
(Figure 6 and 8).

6. The authors used a centered-log-ratio (CLR) transformation (L150). To do this a
pseudocount needs to be added to values to avoid taking the logarithm of zero. What
pseudocount was chosen and how did the choice of pseudocount affect the results?
Thank you for the comment. You are correct in that a pseudo-count was added. This was done
using the multiplicative replacement procedure10. We did not feel it was appropriate to address
the effect of the pseudo-count at this time since these tests would be outside the scope of this
work. The main aim of this study was to determine if metric learning can be successfully applied
to ecological datasets and our results support this position. However, we do agree that this is an
important consideration and should be addressed in future work that is specifically focused on
this issue.

7. I wonder whether the data were rarefied to a common number of sequences? Jaccard is
highly susceptible to uneven sampling efforts. I suspect Aitchison is as well.

Thank you for this comment. We did not rarefy the original data. Upon further consideration, we
implemented this procedure and normalized each library such that the size was equal to the 15th
percentile of all reads11,12. The library size to which samples would be normalized was calculated
using the training dataset and this value applied to both the training and test datasets (libraries
smaller than this were removed from the analysis). This was only done for presence-absence data
and data which was to be used to measure the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity between samples. Our
methods now reflect these changes (Lines 514-523).

8. The description of the sequence curation is confusing at L137. It reads as though samples
with confidence scores below 80% were removed from dataset. The Flynn dataset at least is
a high quality dataset that likely has a very low sequencing error rate (full 2-fold coverage
of the V4 region). I'm not sure why the authors would chose to remove such sequences. I
would be curious what fraction of the sequences were removed.

Thank you for this comment. The ASVs were originally removed since the confidence in their
assignment was below 80%. Originally, we only wanted to analyze ASVs which could be
confidently assigned to a particular genus. However, upon further consideration, we re-ran the
analysis with all ASVs included. If an ASV could not be confidently identified, it was set as
“Unclassified”. Our methods section has been changed to reflect this concern (Lines 303-304).

9. I appreciate the authors' attempts to respond to my comments and those of the other
reviewer. On the whole, I do not feel that the authors were fully responsive to our
comments.

We hope that our modifications to your initial comments are more insightful and address this
concern more fully. We appreciate the time and effort taken to review this manuscript and hope
that you see this as a substantial improvement over the original work.

10. This is exemplified by the fact that they did not submit a marked up version of the
manuscript. Rather, their marked up manuscript is a bunch of comments point to where
the reviewers made comments. It is not possible to look at the marked up version of the
manuscript and see what has changed.

We apologize for this oversight and have now provided a marked up manuscript with extensive
revisions for your review.
11. Furthermore, in their response to the reviews, the authors mentioned several times that
there wasn't enough time to complete an analysis. Science is not a timed trial. Work needs
to be done to couch the analysis in the proper context. I am still unclear why the authors
chose the relatively small Flynn dataset with large effect size rather than a larger, more
realistic dataset with a more modest effect size that has alreadly been studied by machine
learning approaches (e.g. the Baxter dataset I mentioned). Also, just because two reviewers
and an editor signed off on an earlier manuscript does not exempt it from further scrutiny.
The effect of adding a pseudocount is potentially problematic and could inflate or deflate
the ability to detect real differences.

This dataset was originally chosen as a case study which could be used to validate our approach.
However, we see the logic in your argument and have therefore removed the small Flynn dataset
and used, as per your recommendation, the Baxter dataset. With respect to the pseudocount
problem, we agree that this work should be done but it is outside the scope of this work for the
aforementioned reasons. In addition, our overall results are consistent with that of the wider
literature regarding IMIDs and colorectcal cancer with many of the ASVs detected as different
between groups by TreeOrdination having known links to these conditions.

12. Rather than brushing off my comments, the authors need to test for overfitting the
authors need to split the data to establish a training and testing set and then repeat the split
a large number of times (e.g. 100 times) to assess for performance and overfitting between
the training and testing datasets.

Given the size of these datasets a large number of cross-validation folds is unlikely to be
necessary. Furthermore, there is no consensus as to how many folds are necessary. For example,
in a recently published work on the gut-microbiome utilized 5-fold, 8-fold, 10-fold, and 100-fold
cross-validation 13–18. We did address this concern by expanding the number of repeats (five) and
using five stratified cross-validation. We have also taken additional measures to limit possible
overfitting. We also addressed how the metric learning approaches taken here address the
problem of overfitting through regularization and randomization (see our response to Comment
1).

13. The manuscript is jargon laden and will be impossible for most microbiologists to make
sense of. If the authors want microbiologists to use this work in their own, then the authors
need to make it much more accessible.

The data are still poorly summarized and presented in the 3 large tables and 7 large figures.

We have made extensive modifications to the manuscript in an attempt to simplify the jargon,
properly summarize the results in the figures, and clarify the goals of this work. We apologize
that this was not addressed fully in the first round of revisions.

Reviewer #2 (Comments for the Author):

Rudar et al present a comparison of methods to differentiate community level differences in
the microbiome. They applied a tree-based algorithm (Landmark), and compared it to two
supervised learning approaches, as well as Jaccard and Aitchison distance, two commonly
used distance metrics. The authors also compared the ability to two ordination techniques
to visually separate the data, applying PCoA and PCoA+UMAP to try and improve
separation. They suggest that their tree-based algorithm can best distinguish the biological
groups of interest, and the dual ordination approach improves visual separation and
encourage the use of the algorithm.
The authors provide a github link to two scripts written in base python to replicate their
work.

Strengths
1. The authors are exploring novel techniques address a common frustration in microbiome
research, where often important covariates only explain a small fraction of the overall
variation in the microbial community. Similarly, the proposal of a secondary UMAP
projection to amplify effects in PCoA space has the potential to enhance understanding

2. Comparisons between different machine learning techniques demonstrate the
appropriateness of the LandMARK to separate the data

3. The use of real data in this simulation demonstrates this work is applicable at biologically
relevant effect sizes and study sizes seen in the actual literature rather than small, toy
datasets.

Thank you for the positive comments and suggestions. We hope that our improvements to the
manuscript work to further clarify these strengths.

Places for Improvement

1. The article needs to clearly identify (1) what LandMARK is and (2) cite the previous
paper. It was not entirely clear that this work built on a previously published algorithm nor
what the abbreviation means when it appears

Thank you for this comment. We have modified our introduction to reflect this comment (see
Lines 250 – 259)

2. The article was submitted as a research article, but appears to present a new tool?
algorithm? computational method?
I did find the code, but its poorly documented and would be difficult to adapt into a new
analysis by anyone by the authors. If this approach is intended for a wider audience (or
even reproducibility beyond this single dataset), additional resources are needed. These
might take the form of better documented code (explain the steps and the motivation), a
wrapper function that takes an input table and framework and applies the appropriate
transforms, a wrapper to perform the search space algorithm, and/or a tutorial...
I don't even know how to construct the environment based on the current available
documentation.

In my original revision in point 2, I raised the issue of a lack of reproducibility and the
TreeOrdination github repo was offered as a solution. Since this paper is supposed to sway
the reader to use the new method, it seemed critical to know it actually worked and if I
could apply the method using one of my favorite datasets.
I was unable to install the Landmark package in a clean python 3.10 conda environment. (I
got an error message that scikit-learn version 1.1.4 was required, and the closest available
version was 1.1.2.) I cannot reasonably review a method that I can't run.
The notebooks that were provided with this manuscript are quite dense and poorly
documented, even for people familiar with python. The tutorial provides very little
information about what format the data needs to be in or any pre-processing steps required.
I anticipate that even if I could get the package installed, it would be a challenge to coerce
the example data on my computer into a format compatible with the tool provided.

Thank you for this comment. To address this concern, we have written Python scripts that
separate the data generation and analysis portions of the analysis. We have also better
documented the code in the form of comments. We apologize for you not being able to get
TreeOrdination and LANDMark working correctly. We have updated these packages to reflect
this problem and hope that the problem is solved. Unfortunately, some of the dependencies (such
as scikit-bio) needed to be modified to make this work. We will provide an updated set of
instructions on how to set up an environment shortly after the submission of this revision. We
will also improve our documentation on how to use TreeOrdination shortly after the submission
of this revision. Finally, we have added which tools were used and their version numbers into the
appropriate methods sections.

3. I'm not sure you can really call the Landmark ordination unsupervised, since you're still
using a supervised feature-selection. It seems like a circular process: you build this
supervised classifier which selects features, convert it into an ordination and then claim it
outperforms entirely unsupervised ordination...
If this is the case, maybe an additional comparison with PL-SDA might be appropriate.

Thank you for this comment. You are correct that LANDMark (and indeed most decision-tree
ensembles) are supervised classifiers. However, they can be used in an “unsupervised” sense if
one changes what the classifier is attempting to classify. In this manuscript, and in other research
related to this procedure, the classifier does not make use of any of the original class labels and is
only tasked to distinguish between real data and randomized data7,19–21. The original data is then
passed through the trained model to create a high-dimensional embedding or similarity matrix. To
be clear on how this process works we revised our methods section to describe how decision tree
ensembles can be used in an unsupervised manner (Lines 339-495).

If I'm misunderstanding, then I think the authors have missed more recent literature
addressing some of their critiques of classic beta diversity metrics. For example, PCA on an
ILR-transformed table (PhILR as an example) or DEICODE (a sparsity aware modified
Aitchison) might be more appropriate comparisons.

In addition, given the move to DEICODE and the focus on the rPCA as a point of
comparison, it seems like a natural comparison should have been feature loadings in that
space.
In the response to reviewers document, it was mentioned that this is a "proof of concept",
and therefore did not represent an exhaustive test. Based on that, the concluding statement
about other metrics being more appropriate still seems very bold.

Thank you for your comments. We have included an additional analysis using the sparsity-aware
robust CLR transformation used by DEICODE. We did not include an analysis of the ILR
transformation as we limited our investigation to more commonly used approaches. However, this
transformation should be included in a more detailed and wider-ranging comparison. While using
the feature loading matrix from RPCA seems like a natural point of comparison, there is an issue
with this algorithm that needs to be considered. RPCA is unable to project new and unseen data
into the lower dimensional space specified by the investigator. Therefore, there is no reliable way
to assess generalization performance of this method (and PCoA) since these methods cannot be
used to create independent training and testing data without causing data leakage. Due to this, the
information in the feature loadings is difficult to assess. For this reason, we felt it wise not to
conduct this comparison since it could result in misleading and overly optimistic results. Instead,
we focused on how TreeOrdination and Shapley scores could be used identify important features
and compared these results with what is reported in the literature (Figures 10-13 and lines 1214-
1464). However, that does not mean that RPCA is not valuable. Since RPCA can identify
uninformative features efficiently we do think it would be interesting to do a follow-up study to
examine how RPCA can work for feature selection. Specifically, it might be possible to use
RPCA as a first-pass filter before a more computationally intensive feature selection algorithm is
applied. Finally, to address your final comment, we hope to have tapered our enthusiasm for this
approach and focused our discussion on how LANDMark and TreeOrdination address an
important gap when it comes to the analysis of community composition.

4. I think the argument in the discussion that a single metric has to capture every aspect of
the data is misleading. There may be a metric that best captures variation within a data set,
but the claim of one true metric seems to dismiss a biological reality where different
ecological mechanisms underpin perturbations in communities. This is not to say
LANDmark-based ordination is not a useful tool, however, I think the discussion could and
should be softened to allow room to test hypotheses around multiple potential ecological
processes

We added an additional discussion addressing a limitation of our work (Lines 1196-1199, 1456-
1460, 1470-1476). We also amended our discussion to state that the choice of transformation is
likely to be dataset dependent and it is important for the investigator to determine which approach
is best given the data and the question being asked (Lines 1196-1199).

5. I know this is a big ask, and may be beyond the scope of reasonable re-analysis, however,
if the claim is that decision tree-based metrics better account for the correlated structure of
the data, it seems simulated data with a known correlation structure would be a better
proof of this than an unsubstantiated claim.

We included a positive and negative control using the procedure described in Martino et al.
(2019)8. The methods used for these tests are outlined in lines 499-506/507-549 and the results
reported in on lines 610-763 Figures 1 – 3, Table 1, and Supplementary Figure 2.
6. I also don't feel you've satisfied issues around jargon that the other reviewer and I raised.
"Hot embedding" (lines 229-231) is unlikely to be familiar to readers of this journal, could
you clarify this term? The SAGE/Shipley methods used for identifying key features is also
not well described. Since these were first published within the last 5 years, it's possible that
even experts in feature selection may not be familiar with these methods.

Thank you for this comment. We attempted to address the issue around jargon once again. For
example, instead of using the term one-hot encoding to explain how proximities are calculated we
simplified the explanation that the aim is to create a binary matrix where each row is a sample
and each column the label of the terminal leaf (Lines 339-395). We also reduced our use of terms
which are field specific (such as manifold) as much as possible. Finally, we provided a brief
explanation on how Shapley values are calculated (Lines 455-498) and removed the calculation
of SAGE values to simplify the reporting of results and the analysis. We hope that changes such
as this addresses the concerns of both reviewers. We also included Supplementary Figure 1 to
provide a visual as to how TreeOrdination creates each projection.

Other Suggestions
1. The mixing and introduction of ASV/OTU seems like a bit of a red herring. My
recommendation would be to describe everything in the table as a "feature" since it could
potentially be an ASV, OTU, species from metagenomic sequencing, or genome. The
method should ultimately be agnostic to the type of feature, it just wants features

We made major modifications in the language throughout the manuscript in an attempt to be
more consistent in our language around features, and that ASVs, OTUs, are features and should
be considered as such. We hope that these changes improve the clarity of the manuscript and
convey to others that this approach can be agnostic to the type of features.

2. Please cite your tools. I shouldn't have to look at your figures to know this was a python
implementation or go through your code to figure out the library defaults to know what was
in your methods. This is especially important since the scipy Jaccard implementation is
slightly different than Jaccard implementations in R.
Also because citation is a very cheap way to keep the resources we all rely on going, since
citation shows a compelling need to funders for maintenance

Thank you for this comment. We re-wrote the methods section and did a better job at describing
which packages were used and the versions of the packages used.

3. Please check the text sizes on the final figures since most are difficult read at the current
DPI. Also, if possible, please provide in-figure legends

New figures were generated. We hope that these are clearer and more informative than previously
used ones.
4. Additional remaining issues:
• The scikit libraries are canonically lowercased. (scikit-learn and scikit-bio).
Addressed.
        • The text in several figures it still too small to read at scale in what will probably be the
        displayed figure. This is a problem in figure S1, figure 5, and several others.
        New figures were generated to hopefully address this problem.


        • You might consider long-transforming p-values when displaying them in boxplots, or
        possibly presenting them as a swarm plot.
        Addressed (Figure 1)


        • Permutative p-values should always be reported with the number of permutations
        Addressed (Figure 4, Supplementary Figure 1)
References
1.   Mentch, L. & Zhou, S. Randomization as Regularization: A Degrees of Freedom Explanation for

     Random Forest Success. Journal of Machine Learning Research 21, 171:1-171:36 (2020).

2.   Rudar, J., Porter, T. M., Wright, M., Golding, G. B. & Hajibabaei, M. LANDMark: An ensemble

     approach to the supervised selection of biomarkers in high-throughput sequencing data. BMC

     Bioinformatics 23, 110 (2022).

3.   Kuncheva, L. A Bound on Kappa-Error Diagrams for Analysis of Classifier Ensembles. IEEE

     Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 25, 494–501 (2013).

4. Kuncheva, L. I. & Rodriguez, J. J. Classifier ensembles with a random linear oracle. IEEE

     Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 19, 500–508 (2007).

5. Suárez-Díaz, J. L., García, S. & Herrera, F. A Tutorial on Distance Metric Learning: Mathematical

     Foundations, Algorithms, Experimental Analysis, Prospects and Challenges (with Appendices on

     Mathematical Background and Detailed Algorithms Explanation). (2018)

     doi:10.48550/ARXIV.1812.05944.

6. Xiong, C., Johnson, D., Xu, R. & Corso, J. J. Random Forests for Metric Learning with Implicit

     Pairwise Position Dependence. in Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD International Conference

     on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 958–966 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2012).

     doi:10.1145/2339530.2339680.
7.   Rhodes, J. S., Cutler, A. & Moon, K. R. Geometry- and Accuracy-Preserving Random Forest

     Proximities. (2022) doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2201.12682.

8.   Martino, C. et al. A Novel Sparse Compositional Technique Reveals Microbial Perturbations.

     mSystems 4, (2019).

9.   Anderson, M. J. & Walsh, D. C. I. PERMANOVA, ANOSIM, and the Mantel test in the face of

     heterogeneous dispersions: What null hypothesis are you testing? Ecological Monographs 83, 557–

     574 (2013).

10. Martín-Fernández, J. A., Barceló-Vidal, C. & Pawlowsky-Glahn, V. Dealing with Zeros and Missing

     Values in Compositional Data Sets Using Nonparametric Imputation. Mathematical Geology 35,

     253–278 (2003).

11. McMurdie, P. J. & Holmes, S. Waste Not, Want Not: Why Rarefying Microbiome Data Is

     Inadmissible. PLoS Computational Biology 10, 1003531 (2014).

12. Weiss, S. et al. Normalization and microbial differential abundance strategies depend upon data

     characteristics. Microbiome 5, (2017).

13. Shen, W. X., Liang, S. R., Jiang, Y. Y. & Chen, Y. Z. Enhanced metagenomic deep learning for

     disease prediction and consistent signature recognition by restructured microbiome 2D

     representations. Patterns 4, 100658 (2023).

14. Bouranis, J. A. et al. Interplay between Cruciferous Vegetables and the Gut Microbiome: A Multi-

     Omic Approach. Nutrients 15, (2023).

15. Wang, H. et al. Perturbed gut microbiome and fecal and serum metabolomes are associated with

     chronic kidney disease severity. Microbiome 11, 3 (2023).

16. Liu, H. et al. MNNMDA: Predicting Human Microbe-Disease Association via a Method to Minimize

     Matrix Nuclear Norm. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal (2023)

     doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2022.12.053.

17. Xi, C. et al. Brain-gut microbiota multimodal predictive model in patients with bipolar depression.

     Journal of Affective Disorders 323, 140–152 (2023).
18. Zhang, H. et al. Tracing human life trajectory using gut microbial communities by context-aware

    deep learning. Briefings in Bioinformatics (2023) doi:10.1093/bib/bbac629.

19. Alhusain, L. & Hafez, A. M. Cluster ensemble based on Random Forests for genetic data. BioData

    Mining 10, 37 (2017).

20. Dalleau, K., Couceiro, M. & Smail-Tabbone, M. Unsupervised Extremely Randomized Trees. in

    Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (eds. Phung, D. et al.) 478–489 (Springer

    International Publishing, 2018).

21. Bernard, S., Cao, H., Sabourin, R. & Heutte, L. Random Forest for Dissimilarity-based Multi-view

    Learning. in Handbook of Pattern Recognition and Computer Vision 119–138 (WORLD

    SCIENTIFIC, 2020). doi:10.1142/9789811211072_0007.
2nd Revision - Editorial Decision                                                                                February 11, 2023

February 11, 2023

Dr. Josip Rudar
University of Guelph
Integrative Biology
Guelph, Ontario
Canada


Re: Spectrum02065-22R2 (Decision Tree Ensembles Utilizing Multivariate Splits Are Effective at Investigating Beta-Diversity in
Medically Relevant 16S Amplicon Sequencing Data)

Dear Dr. Josip Rudar:

Congratulations on the acceptance of your manuscript for publication in Spectrum.

Your manuscript has been accepted, and I am forwarding it to the ASM Journals Department for publication. You will be notified
when your proofs are ready to be viewed.

The ASM Journals program strives for constant improvement in our submission and publication process. Please tell us how we
can improve your experience by taking this quick Author Survey.

Publication Fees: We have partnered with Copyright Clearance Center to collect author charges. You will soon receive a
message from no-reply@copyright.com with further instructions. For questions related to paying charges through RightsLink,
please contact Copyright Clearance Center by email at ASM_Support@copyright.com or toll free at +1.877.622.5543. Hours of
operation: 24 hours per day, 7 days per week. Copyright Clearance Center makes every attempt to respond to all emails within
24 hours. For a complete list of Publication Fees, including supplemental material costs, please visit ourwebsite.

ASM policy requires that data be available to the public upon online posting of the article, so please verify all links to sequence
records, if present, and make sure that each number retrieves the full record of the data. If a new accession number is not linked
or a link is broken, provide production staff with the correct URL for the record. If the accession numbers for new data are not
publicly accessible before the expected online posting of the article, publication of your article may be delayed; please contact
the ASM production staff immediately with the expected release date.

Corresponding authors may join or renew ASM membership to obtain discounts on publication fees. Need to upgrade your
membership level? Please contact Customer Service at Service@asmusa.org.


Thank you for submitting your paper to Spectrum.

Sincerely,

Jan Claesen
Editor, Microbiology Spectrum

Journals Department
American Society for Microbiology
1752 N St., NW
Washington, DC 20036
E-mail: spectrum@asmusa.org
