             cancers
Article
Associations between the Gut Microbiota, Race, and Ethnicity
of Patients with Colorectal Cancer: A Pilot and Feasibility Study
Sorbarikor Piawah 1,2,3, *, Than S. Kyaw 4,5 , Kai Trepka 4 , Anita L. Stewart 3,6,7 , Rosa V. Mora 5 , Dalila Stanfield 2 ,
Kendall Levine 1,8 , Erin L. Van Blarigan 9,10 , Alan Venook 1,2 , Peter J. Turnbaugh 4,11 , Tung Nguyen 1,2,3,†
and Chloe E. Atreya 1,2,12,†

                                         1    Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
                                         2    Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
                                         3    UCSF Center for Aging in Diverse Communities, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
                                         4    Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 92521, USA
                                         5    School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 92521, USA
                                         6    Institute for Health & Aging, University of California, San Francisco, CA 92521, USA
                                         7    School of Nursing, University of California, San Francisco, CA 92521, USA
                                         8    Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco, CA 94110, USA
                                         9    Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 92521, USA
                                         10   Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, CA 92521, USA
                                         11   Chan Zuckerberg Biohub-San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 40385, USA
                                         12   Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, San Francisco, CA 94115, USA
                                         *    Correspondence: sorbarikor.piawah@ucsf.edu
                                         †    These authors contributed equally to this work.


                                         Simple Summary: The trillions of microorganisms found in the human gut have broad impacts on
                                         health and disease including altering the risk of colorectal cancer. Given the emerging evidence that
                                         both the microbiome and colorectal cancer differ between racial and ethnic groups, we sought to
                                         explore the relationship between the gut microbiome and cancer health disparities. We performed
Citation: Piawah, S.; Kyaw, T.S.;        a pilot and feasibility study in which 30 colorectal cancer patients from different racial and ethnic
Trepka, K.; Stewart, A.L.; Mora, R.V.;   backgrounds were recruited to provide a stool sample and to complete a dietary survey. The majority
Stanfield, D.; Levine, K.;               (18/30) of participants were successfully sampled, providing preliminary support for associations
Van Blarigan, E.L.; Venook, A.;          between their gut microbes according to racial and ethnic background. Overall, this study supports
Turnbaugh, P.J.; et al. Associations
                                         the feasibility of analyzing the links between gut microbes and colorectal cancer disparities, laying
between the Gut Microbiota, Race,
                                         the groundwork for large follow-up studies.
and Ethnicity of Patients with
Colorectal Cancer: A Pilot and
                                         Abstract: Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is more prevalent among some racial and ethnic
Feasibility Study. Cancers 2023, 15,
                                         minority and low socioeconomic status populations. Although the gut microbiota is a risk factor
4546. https://doi.org/10.3390/
cancers15184546
                                         for CRC and varies with race and ethnicity, its role in CRC disparities remains poorly understood.
                                         Methods: We examined the feasibility of recruiting sociodemographically diverse CRC patients
Academic Editor: Kekoa Taparra
                                         for a microbiome study involving a home stool collection. We also explored whether race and
Received: 20 June 2023                   ethnicity were associated with gut microbiome composition. We recruited Black/African American,
Revised: 6 September 2023                Hispanic/Latino, and non-Hispanic White patients who were receiving care for active CRC to
Accepted: 8 September 2023               complete a comprehensive dietary and lifestyle survey, self-collect a stool sample, and complete
Published: 13 September 2023             an exit interview. Gut microbial diversity and composition were analyzed using 16S rRNA gene
                                         sequencing. Results: 30 individuals consented (of 35 who were eligible and contacted) with 5 (17%)
                                         Black/African American, 11 (37%) Hispanic/Latino, and 14 (46%) non-Hispanic White. A total of
                                         22 (73%) completed the dietary and lifestyle survey; 18 (63%) returned a stool sample. Even after
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
                                         controlling for socioeconomic, dietary, or treatment-related covariates, microbiome composition
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                         was associated with race and ethnicity. Fusobacteriota (a phylum associated with the development
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
                                         and progression of CRC) was significantly higher in the Black/African American group compared
conditions of the Creative Commons       to others, and microbial diversity was higher in samples from non-Hispanic White individuals
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://    compared to Hispanic/Latino individuals. Conclusion: Our study shows that it is feasible to recruit
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/         and collect stool samples from diverse individuals with CRC and found significant associations in
4.0/).                                   gut microbial structure with race and ethnicity.




Cancers 2023, 15, 4546. https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15184546                                               https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cancers
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                              2 of 15




                         Keywords: colorectal cancer; microbiome; disparities; recruitment; implementation; race




                         1. Introduction
                               Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a common and challenging disease [1]. Although CRC
                         incidence has declined in the last 20 years, racial and ethnic disparities persist [2], with
                         Black/African Americans 20% more likely to be diagnosed and 40% more likely to die than
                         Non-Latino White individuals [3]. Rates of young-onset CRC (age less than 50 at diagnosis)
                         are rising most rapidly among Hispanic/Latino Americans [4,5]. Past studies exploring
                         these disparities have demonstrated the contribution of factors such as race and ethnic
                         differences in access to care, diet, and lifestyle [6]. However, efforts to reduce disparities
                         by targeting these factors alone have had limited success, suggesting the presence of
                         other factors [7].
                               There is a growing literature linking the gut microbiota (the trillions of microbes in
                         the gastrointestinal (GI) tract) and their aggregate genomes (the gut microbiome) in CRC
                         risk and treatment [8–18]. Gut bacteria including Fusobacterium nucleatum, Enterococcus
                         faecalis, Bacteroides fragilis, and Streptococcus gallolyticus may contribute to the pathogenesis
                         of CRC through interactions with immune cells, initiating inflammatory and pro-oncogenic
                         cascades, releasing genotoxins, and other mechanisms [8–18]. Similarly, the gut microbiome
                         can play a role in the efficacy and toxicity of chemotherapy by altering the absorption and
                         metabolism of drugs through direct and indirect methods [19,20]. Several studies have
                         demonstrated the impact of the gut microbiome on the efficacy of immunotherapy, via
                         interactions between gut bacteria, immune cells, and the tumor microenvironment [8,19].
                               However, there are still few studies exploring the interactions between CRC and gut
                         microbiota with race and ethnicity. Outside the context of CRC, variability in the gut
                         microbiota has been associated with race and ethnicity, but the mechanisms responsible are
                         not yet well understood [21–23]. A few pilot studies have begun to describe differences
                         in the gut microbiome of patients with CRC by race [24,25]. However, research has been
                         limited by challenges in recruiting adequate numbers of diverse individuals to participate
                         and complete the complex study procedures needed to accurately study these associations
                         in a reproducible manner.
                               We conducted a pilot study to assess the feasibility of recruiting sociodemographically
                         diverse CRC patients for a microbiome study involving a home stool collection and a
                         diet and lifestyle questionnaire. Here, we present these feasibility data and the results of
                         exploratory analyses of racial and ethnic differences in the microbiome composition of
                         the samples. We also discuss suggestions for modifications to the methods to increase the
                         chances of success in a larger-scale follow-on study.

                         2. Materials and Methods
                         2.1. Study Design
                              This was a prospective cross-sectional pilot study of patients with CRC receiving care
                         at the Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital (ZSFGH), San Francisco’s largest safety
                         net public hospital, or at the gastrointestinal oncology clinics at the University of California
                         San Francisco (UCSF). This study was approved by the UCSF Institutional Review Board.

                         2.2. Eligibility
                              We aimed to recruit 60 adult (≥18 years of age) English-speaking patients self-
                         identifying as Black/African American, Hispanic/Latino, or non-Hispanic White who
                         were receiving active treatment for any stage of CRC. We limited our recruitment to these
                         racial and ethnic groups in part because disparities in CRC incidence are most pronounced
                         between them, and because of limitations on the budget for our one-year pilot.
                              Given the influence of cancer-directed therapies on the gut microbiome [8] and the
                         expected duration of these effects, we excluded individuals who were unable to have a
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                             3 of 15




                         break of at least 12–14 days from chemotherapy, biologic therapy, or immunotherapy prior
                         to stool collection. Similarly, given the potential impact of antibiotics on the composition
                         of the gut microbiome [26,27], we also excluded those who had either received antibiotics
                         within 4 weeks prior to enrollment, or completed a course of antibiotics longer than 2 weeks
                         in the 6 months before enrollment.

                         2.3. Recruitment
                              We sought to enroll approximately equal numbers of Black/African American, His-
                         panic/Latino, and non-Hispanic White patients. We prioritized the recruitment and enroll-
                         ment of Hispanic and Black/African American individuals early in the study period and
                         planned to cap enrollment of non-Hispanic White individuals to no more than 1/3 of the
                         study population.
                              To identify potentially eligible patients, we obtained a list from two sources: direct
                         referrals of any patient with active CRC from treating physicians and weekly review of
                         providers’ schedules at each site, identifying patients for whom colon or rectal cancer
                         was listed as either the diagnosis or the reason for their visit. Potentially eligible patients
                         from both sources were entered in a secure screening log including name, medical record
                         number, diagnosis, race, and ethnicity.
                              The study team was racially and ethnically diverse and conducted a brief screen of the
                         electronic health record (EHR) to assess eligibility prior to contacting the patient. Eligibility
                         criteria were active disease on imaging, not receiving antibiotics, being able to have a
                         12–14-day break in therapy, and English fluency. Eligible patients were then contacted.
                         Due to in-person research restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic during the study
                         period, this initial contact was restricted to telephone calls at both sites. Coordinators
                         were instructed to call potentially eligible individuals 3 times over the course of 4 weeks
                         before considering them “unable to be reached”. Due to patient confidentiality concerns,
                         voicemails were not left, and email was not utilized. Once a person was contacted, a
                         formal telephone recruitment script was utilized at both study sites. Research staff briefly
                         described the study including its aims, procedures, duration, and compensation (script
                         details are included in Supplementary Figure S1). Interested patients were then screened
                         again for confirmation of eligibility (queried primarily about antibiotic use and current
                         cancer therapy).
                              Eligible patients who completed the telephone interview were then invited to schedule
                         a separate consent meeting either via telephone with documents signed electronically or in
                         person at an upcoming clinical visit.

                         2.4. Study Procedures
                              We collected: (1) relevant medical history and eligibility criteria via review of EHR and
                         at the initial telephone contact, (2) diet information via an online or paper comprehensive
                         survey estimated to take 1 h, and (3) a stool biospecimen. At the end of the study, a
                         semi-structured exit interview was administered via telephone or in person.
                         (1)   Review of EHR: After consent, clinical and medical history were collected through
                               review of participants’ EHR: clinical details of their CRC diagnosis (e.g., anatomic
                               subsite, stage), treatment history, family history, antibiotic use, and other medical
                               history not captured in the comprehensive survey. Demographics collected from the
                               EHR included self-reported gender, age, and race and ethnicity.
                         (2)   Comprehensive survey: Usual dietary intake was measured using a comprehensive
                               diet and lifestyle survey that incorporated a validated food frequency questionnaire
                               (FFQ) developed at Harvard [28]. This FFQ is utilized in ongoing microbiome studies
                               at UCSF and nationally. The survey also collected height and weight, smoking
                               and drug history, alcohol use, sun exposure, sleep, physical activity, supplement
                               use, and complementary medicines. Medical history was also queried, including
                               family medical history, personal medical history, and early life history. Individuals
                               who consented via telephone completed the survey electronically using a Research
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                            4 of 15




                               Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) database [29,30]. Those who completed consent
                               in person were given the option of completing the survey in person on paper with
                               the research coordinator or online in REDCap. The preferred method of survey
                               completion was also recorded.
                         (3)   Biospecimen collection: Participants received a stool collection kit. Those who com-
                               pleted consent via telephone received the kit in the mail via FedEx while those who
                               completed consent in person received the kit on the day of consent. Kits were designed
                               by the Harvard Chan Microbiome Health Center BIOM-Mass program and have been
                               used for other pilots at UCSF and Harvard [31]. Kits contained detailed instructions
                               and all materials necessary for the collection of one stool sample, including the fol-
                               lowing: 1 ethanol collection tube 1 anaerobic collection tube 2 bio-specimen bags
                               1 pair of gloves 2 paper accessories to attach to toilet seat 2 spatulas 4 barcode labels
                               (2 for samples, 1 for the stool questionnaire and 1 extra) Pre-paid and pre-addressed
                               FedEx envelopes.
                                Briefly, participants were instructed to attach a stool collection paper accessory to a
                         toilet seat and use a spatula to collect one scoop of stool each from the same bowel move-
                         ment into the anaerobic culture tube and the ethanol tube. Samples collected from ostomy
                         bags were permitted. If desired, the coordinator was available to review instructions with
                         participants via telephone. Participants were also asked to complete a short questionnaire
                         on paper at the time of sample collection to assess bowel habits and stool consistency
                         (i.e., Bristol Stool Scale) and to provide an opportunity to give written feedback on the
                         collection process. Lastly, participants were instructed to mail back the collected samples
                         and survey to UCSF using pre-paid and pre-addressed FedEx envelopes. Upon receipt,
                         samples were immediately banked and stored at −80 ◦ C.
                                Participants were contacted via telephone at least weekly for up to approximately
                         1 month for reminders to complete stool collection and return kits. A patient was consid-
                         ered lost to follow up if a kit was never returned and they were unable to be reached in
                         this time.
                         (4)   Exit interview to assess acceptability of study procedures: Upon confirmation of
                               receipt of collected samples in our microbiome lab, participants who returned the
                               kit were contacted to complete an exit interview. Those who did not complete all
                               study tasks were not contacted. The exit interview was conducted by research staff via
                               telephone or in person, and elicited feedback on reasons for participation in the study,
                               overall experience, and difficulties with the stool collection process. Participants were
                               also given an opportunity to provide suggestions for improvement. Upon completion
                               of this interview, participants received a $25 gift card.

                         2.5. Tracking Recruitment
                               To assess the feasibility of recruitment, we documented patient loss at each step and
                         whether there were specific sources of losing potential patients throughout the recruitment
                         process, as detailed in Supplementary Table S1. A secure Excel database was used to track
                         patients identified from a review of provider schedules and referrals. The date of EHR
                         review and reasons for ineligibility were recorded. For potentially eligible participants, we
                         recorded the method and date of initial telephone contact, whether they were interested in
                         the study, additional reasons for ineligibility, and reasons for declining the study. For those
                         willing to consent, we recorded the completion of a consent visit and any further reasons
                         for ineligibility. In addition, we report the time needed to meet our target sample size of 60.

                         2.6. Tracking Completion of Study Procedures
                              To assess the feasibility of data collection, we developed a detailed data collection
                         protocol, including strategies for assuring completion of all assessments and methods for
                         tracking compliance with the assessments. Upon receipt of consent documents, participants
                         were registered in the REDCap database. REDCap was also used to track each step from
                         participant consent to completion of the exit interview, including completion rates of the
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                            5 of 15




                         diet/lifestyle survey, stool kit survey, and the exit interview, as well as completion of stool
                         collection, and reasons for non-completion of study components. We report the proportion
                         of consented participants who completed stool collection, and the proportion of consented
                         participants who completed the survey.

                         2.7. Data Analysis
                               We used descriptive statistics [means (standard deviation, SD) and median (interquar-
                         tile range, IQR) for continuous variables and proportions for categorical variables] to
                         summarize participant characteristics at enrollment.

                         2.8. Microbiome Analysis
                              DNA was extracted from ethanol-preserved stool samples using the International Hu-
                         man Microbiome Standard operating procedure (IHMS Protocol Q) [32] and the 16S rRNA
                         gene sequencing library was constructed using dual error-correcting barcodes. Briefly,
                         quantitative primary PCR was performed using KAPA HiFi Hot Start kit (KAPA KK2502)
                         and V4 515F/806R Nextera primers. The amplified products were diluted 1:100 in Ultra-
                         Pure DNase/RNase-free water and were barcoded using unique dual indexing primers.
                         The products were quantified using Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Assay Kit (Invitrogen
                         P11496) and pooled at equimolar concentrations. The pooled library was quantified via
                         qPCR using the KAPA Library Quantification Kit (KAPA KK4824) and sequenced on the
                         Illumina MiSeq platform. Demultiplexed sequences were processed using a 16S rRNA
                         gene analysis pipeline [33]. High-quality reads were then analyzed using qiime2R [34] and
                         phyloseq [35] in R. Alpha diversity was assessed through a number of observed amplicon
                         sequence variants (ASVs) subsampled at 8166 reads and Shannon diversity index. Beta
                         diversity was analyzed using the Bray–Curtis metric. For association analysis, education
                         was binned into yes/no post-secondary degree (including Associate’s, Trade/Vocational,
                         Bachelor’s, and Doctoral) and diet-related variables were quantitated as described previ-
                         ously [36], with American Cancer Society (ACS) diet sub-scores used to score the intake
                         of whole grains, fruit/vegetables, meat, alcohol, and BMI. Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
                         was used to test associations between covariates and Shannon alpha diversity. Multi-
                         variate permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) on the Bray–Curtis distance
                         matrix was used to uncover the associations between covariates and microbial community
                         structures. A term-wise PERMANOVA with race and ethnicity as the final term (distance
                         ~ Σcovariate + race and ethnicity) was used to test the effect of dietary, socioeconomic,
                         and treatment-related confounders on the relationship between race and ethnicity and
                         microbial community structure. For association analyses, nominal p < 0.05 was considered
                         significant. Differentially abundant ASVs were determined using DESeq2 package in R
                         with significance defined as |log2 fold-change| > 1 and false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.1.
                         Sequencing data have been deposited under the NCBI BioProject PRJNA918703.

                         2.9. Thematic Analysis of Exit Interviews
                              Interviews were transcribed in real time by the interviewer. Briefly, themes from
                         open-ended questions were identified through inductive coding of each interview tran-
                         script by two separate blinded reviewers: one used Dedoose software, whereas another
                         coded by hand. The principal investigator served as a third reviewer to confirm emerging
                         themes. Interviews also included two Likert scale questions that were analyzed using
                         descriptive statistics.

                         3. Results
                         3.1. Recruitment
                             As described in Figure 1, during the 1-year study period, we received 302 patient
                         names, a majority from a review of providers’ schedules across both sites—278 from UCSF
                         and 24 from ZSFGH. Self-identified race and ethnicity were as follows: 31 Black/African
                         American (10%), 61 Hispanic/Latino (20%), and 210 non-Hispanic White (70%).
                         3. Results
                         3.1. Recruitment
                             As described in Figure 1, during the 1-year study period, we received 302 patient
                         names, a majority from a review of providers’ schedules across both sites—278 from UCSF
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                      6 of 15
                         and 24 from ZSFGH. Self-identified race and ethnicity were as follows: 31 Black/African
                         American (10%), 61 Hispanic/Latino (20%), and 210 non-Hispanic White (70%).




                         Figure
                         Figure 1.
                                1. Recruitment
                                   Recruitment and
                                               and completion
                                                   completion of
                                                              of study
                                                                 study procedures.
                                                                       procedures.

                              Of the 302 patient charts reviewed, 177 (59%) across both sites (17 at ZSFGH, 160 at
                         UCSF) were ineligible. The reasons for ineligibility were as follows: use of antibiotics
                         outside of eligibility windows (11%), no evidence of active disease or on surveillance
                         (32%), ineligible concurrent treatment (16%), preferred language other than English (6%),
                         provider discretion (9%), and other reasons (26%). Other reasons included patients who
                         were deceased, insufficient records to confirm eligibility, those who were enrolled in another
                         study, and those who did not have histologic confirmation of CRC.
                              In total, 125 participants were potentially eligible (7 at ZSFGH and 118 at UCSF). We
                         made initial telephone contact with all 7 eligible participants at ZSFGH and 45 eligible
                         participants at UCSF (a total of 52, 42% of 125 potentially eligible). The remainder (73) were
                         unable to be reached despite three phone calls during business hours on weekdays, over
                         4 weeks.
                              Of the 52 patients for whom initial telephone contact was made, confirmation of
                         eligibility via self-report resulted in 9 becoming ineligible due to new use of antibiotics,
                         newly on surveillance, clinical decline, or change in therapy. Of the 43 eligible, 8 (19%)
                         declined participation: 5 due to lack of interest in the study, 2 due to feeling overwhelmed
                         by their disease, and 1 due to irregular bowel habits making it difficult to collect stool. The
                         remaining 35 of these 52 individuals (67%) who were eligible and interested in the study
                         agreed to be contacted again for formal consent.
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                         7 of 15




                               Of the 35 who agreed to be re-contacted for consent, 5 (11%) did not return repeat
                         phone calls to schedule a formal consent visit. The remaining 30 consented to participate in
                         the study. A total of 4 individuals were recruited from ZSFGH and consented in person in
                         a clinic, whereas the 26 individuals recruited from UCSF consented via telephone.

                         3.2. Participation Rate by Race and Ethnicity
                              Of the sampling frame of 302 names, 52 individuals were eligible and able to be
                         reached to introduce the study, and 30 (58%) ultimately consented. Characteristics for
                         enrolled patients are presented in Table 1. The participation rate was 42% (5/12) among
                         Black/African American individuals, 55% (11/20) among Hispanic/Latino individuals,
                         and 70% (14/20) among non-Hispanic White individuals.

                         Table 1. Sample characteristics.

                                                                                         N (%)
                          Enrolled Patients (n = 30)
                          Recruitment site
                              UCSF                                                       26 (87%)
                              ZSFGH                                                      4 (13%)
                          Race and Ethnicity
                               Black/African American                                    5 (17%)
                               Hispanic                                                  11 (37%)
                               Non-Hispanic White                                        14 (46%)
                          Age at diagnosis (yrs)
                              ≥50                                                        12 (40%)
                              <50                                                        18 (60%)
                          Cancer stage
                              I and II                                                   8 (27%)
                              III                                                        9 (30%)
                              IV                                                         13 (43%)
                          % Female                                                       15 (50%)
                          % Male                                                         15 (50%)
                          Anatomic Subsite
                              Transverse                                                 2 (7%)
                              Ascending/Cecum                                            6 (20%)
                              Sigmoid/Descending                                         5 (16%)
                              Rectosigmoid                                               2 (7%)
                              Rectum                                                     15 (50%)
                          Survey and Stool Completion (n = 18)
                          Race and Ethnicity
                               Black/African American                                    4 (22%)
                               Hispanic/Latino                                           7 (39%)
                               Non-Hispanic White                                        7 (39%)
                          Insurance
                               Private                                                   8 (44%)
                               Medicare                                                  3 (17%)
                               Medicaid                                                  6 (33%)
                               Not reported                                              1 (6%)
                          Education
                              High school                                                3 (17%)
                              Some college                                               6 (33%)
                              Trade/vocational                                           1 (6%)
                              Associate’s degree                                         3 (17%)
                              Bachelor’s                                                 3 (17%)
                              Doctoral                                                   2 (11%)
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                           8 of 15




                         Table 1. Cont.

                          Prior Surgery to Resect Primary Tumor
                               Yes                                                        8 (44%)
                               No                                                         10 (56%)
                          Prior Radiation
                               Yes                                                        4 (22%)
                               No                                                         14 (78%)
                          Any Ostomy at Time of Collection
                                                                                          8 (44%) (any colostomy or
                               Yes
                                                                                          ileostomy)
                               No                                                         10 (56%)
                          Ileostomy at Time of Collection
                                Yes                                                       2 (11%)
                                No                                                        16 (89%)


                         3.3. Completion of Study Procedures
                              For the 30 individuals enrolled, Figure 1 presents the completion rates of study pro-
                         cedures. Of the 30 individuals who consented to the study, 1 withdrew from the study
                         immediately after consenting due to a synchronous diagnosis of breast cancer.
                              Of the 30 who consented, 22 (73%) completed the comprehensive survey—18 com-
                         pleted this survey online, whereas 4 individuals receiving care at ZSFGH completed it on
                         paper with the assistance of a research coordinator. One became ineligible after consent
                         but before receiving the collection kit and survey materials. Two individuals passed away
                         between consent and completion of surveys, two were ineligible due to the new use of
                         antibiotics, and three were provided a survey link but never completed and were lost to
                         follow-up despite three reminder phone calls. All sections of returned surveys were com-
                         pleted. After receiving the kit, seven participants withdrew. All 18 remaining participants
                         (60%) returned the stool kits.
                              There were no stool kits returned without completion of the survey. A total of 17
                         of those who returned stool kits also completed an exit interview, while 1 was lost to
                         follow-up. Of these 17 individuals, 15 (88%) were from UCSF and 2 (12%) from ZSFGH.
                         Four (24%) identified as Black/African American, six (35%) as Hispanic/Latino, and seven
                         (41%) identified as non-Hispanic White.

                         3.4. Retention Rate by Race and Ethnicity
                              The overall retention rate (proportion of individuals who completed all study tasks)
                         was 61% (17 of 28 consented individuals who were alive at the end of the study pe-
                         riod); 100% (4/4) among Black/African American individuals, 60% (6/10) among His-
                         panic/Latino individuals, and 50% (7/14) among non-Hispanic White individuals.

                         3.5. Acceptability of Study Procedures
                              All participants in the exit interview stated that they were likely or very likely to
                         collect stool at home if requested by their doctor as part of clinical care. A total of 94%
                         were likely or very likely to participate in another study that requires home stool collection
                         using the same kit, 88% were likely or very likely to participate in another study that
                         requires completion of the same comprehensive survey, and 65% were likely or very likely
                         to recommend the study to a friend.
                              Thematic analysis demonstrated that at least half of the participants interviewed had
                         no problems with the study procedures. Most described the sample collection process and
                         survey as easy and chose to participate in the study to help other patients with cancer,
                         and to contribute to the field of microbiome research. Below are some suggestions raised
                         by participants.
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                            9 of 15




                         3.5.1. Experience with Stool Collection Process
                              Six participants felt that the collection process was messy and complicated as the
                         collection tubes were too small and the toilet seat cover was difficult to place. Four felt
                         that the instructions included in the kits were not easy to follow and contained a lot of
                         information. The most frequent suggestions were to include larger containers for collection
                         and to simplify the instructions. One person suggested including a video demonstration.

                         3.5.2. Experience with the Comprehensive Survey
                              The most common theme was that the survey was too long and time-consuming,
                         and that it was difficult to remember all foods eaten. Two participants suggested that
                         participants should be reminded to keep a food diary to better recall foods eaten prior to
                         completion of the survey whereas three suggested shortening the survey.

                         3.6. Results of Microbiota Analyses
                              Despite the small sample size of this pilot and feasibility study relative to prior work
                         on the gut microbiota with respect to race and ethnicity [22,23], we found statistically
                         significant differences between groups. All 18 samples collected from Black/African
                         American (AA), Hispanic/Latino (L), and non-Hispanic White (W) participants were
                         evaluable and successfully sequenced, with comparable sequencing depth between groups
                         (Supplementary Table S2).
                              Race and ethnicity were significantly associated with overall gut microbial commu-
                         nity structure, accounting for 15% of the variation in our dataset (Figure 2a). We did not
                         find any significant association with reported biological sex (Figure 2a). Principal coor-
                         dinates analysis showed a clear separation between the microbiotas of Hispanic/Latino
                         and non-Hispanic White individuals, with Black/African American individuals more
                         dispersed (Figure 2a). Microbial diversity, assessed using the observed amplicon se-
                         quence variants (ASVs) and the Shannon diversity index, was significantly higher in
                         samples from non-Hispanic White relative to Hispanic/Latino individuals (Figure 2b;
                         Supplementary Table S2). Black/African American individuals also trended higher but
                         did not reach statistical significance (Figure 2b; Supplementary Table S2).
                              We also detected significant differences in microbial abundances between racial and
                         ethnic groups at the phylum and ASV levels (Figure 2c,d; Supplementary Tables S3 and S4).
                         The Hispanic/Latino group had significantly higher Actinobacteriota compared to the non-
                         Hispanic White group; Black/African American individuals also trended lower relative to
                         the Hispanic/Latino group (Figure 2c,d, Supplementary Table S3). Of note, Fusobacteriota, a
                         phylum that contains Fusobacterium nucleatum, a species consistently associated with colorectal
                         cancer pathogenesis [8], was significantly higher among Black/African American participants
                         compared to non-Hispanic White participants (Figure 2d; Supplementary Table S3).
                              We performed all possible pairwise comparisons to search for differentially abun-
                         dant ASVs. Compared to Hispanic/Latino participants, Black/African American partici-
                         pants had 17 depleted ASVs and 18 enriched ASVs (Figure 2e, Supplementary Table S4).
                         Compared to non-Hispanic White participants, Black/African American participants had
                         23 ASVs depleted and 6 ASVs enriched. Similarly, 33 ASVs were depleted and 12 ASVs
                         were enriched among Hispanic/Latino participants compared to non-Hispanic White
                         participants (Figure 2e, Supplementary Table S4). Fusobacterium, a genus associated with
                         colorectal cancer, was only detected in 4/18 (22%) samples (Supplementary Table S4).
Cancers
Cancers2023,
        2023,15,
              15,x4546
                   FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                    1010ofof15
                                                                                                                                               15




                                 Figure 2. Race and ethnicity are associated with the gut microbiota of colorectal cancer (CRC)
                                Figure 2. Race and ethnicity are associated with the gut microbiota of colorectal cancer (CRC) pa-
                                 patients. (a) Principal coordinate analysis using Bray–Curtis distance matrix (permutational multi-
                                tients. (a) Principal coordinate analysis using Bray–Curtis distance matrix (permutational multivar-
                                 variate analysis of variance test using ADONIS statistical package). (b) Alpha diversity measure-
                                iate analysis of variance test using ADONIS statistical package). (b) Alpha diversity measurements
                                 mentsobserved
                                using    using observed
                                                    amplicon  amplicon
                                                                sequencesequence
                                                                           variants variants (ASVs)
                                                                                    (ASVs) and       and Shannon
                                                                                                 Shannon   diversity diversity    index(Supple-
                                                                                                                       index metrics     metrics
                                 (Supplementary       Table  S2). (c) Microbial  community    composition     at the  phylum
                                mentary Table S2). (c) Microbial community composition at the phylum level. Each bar represents level.  Each  bar
                                 represents   stool  from  one  participant. Short horizontal lines within bars   represent  different
                                stool from one participant. Short horizontal lines within bars represent diﬀerent amplicon sequence     amplicon
                                variants.
                                 sequence(d)    Centered
                                             variants.   (d)log-ratio  (CLR)-transformed
                                                              Centered log-ratio            abundances of
                                                                                  (CLR)-transformed         bacterial of
                                                                                                        abundances      phyla  with phyla
                                                                                                                          bacterial  significant
                                                                                                                                             with
                                diﬀerences
                                 significant between
                                               differencesgroups   (Supplementary
                                                             between                 Table S3). (e)
                                                                        groups (Supplementary       Volcano
                                                                                                  Table        plots
                                                                                                        S3). (e)     of diﬀerential
                                                                                                                  Volcano              abundant
                                                                                                                            plots of differential
                                ASVs   fromASVs
                                 abundant      pairwise
                                                     fromcomparisons      among Black/African
                                                           pairwise comparisons                  AmericanAmerican
                                                                                    among Black/African      (AA), Hispanic/Latino      (L), and
                                                                                                                        (AA), Hispanic/Latino
                                non-Hispanic     White    (W)  using  DESeq   package  (see Supplementary     Table  S4 for
                                 (L), and non-Hispanic White (W) using DESeq package (see Supplementary Table S4 for genus  genus   and  species
                                                                                                                                              and
                                identification). Significant ASVs were defined as |log2 fold-change|>1 and false discovery rate <0.1.
                                 species identification). Significant ASVs were defined as |log2 fold-change| > 1 and false discovery
                                The number of significant ASVs is indicated in the plot. p-values shown in panels (b,d) are from one-
                                 rate < 0.1. The number of significant ASVs is indicated in the plot. p-values shown in panels (b,d) are
                                way ANOVA tests with Tukey’s multiple comparison correction.
                                 from one-way ANOVA tests with Tukey’s multiple comparison correction.
                                      We also detected significant diﬀerences in microbial abundances between racial and
                                      Next, we set out to determine whether the relationship between race, ethnicity, and
                                ethnic groups at the phylum and ASV levels (Figure 2c,d; Supplementary Tables S3 and
                                 gut microbiota might be confounded by socioeconomic, dietary, and/or treatment (prior
                                S4). The Hispanic/Latino group had significantly higher Actinobacteriota compared to the
                                 bowel surgery, radiation, and presence of any ostomy or ileostomy) covariates. None of
                                non-Hispanic White group; Black/African American individuals also trended lower rela-
                                 the tested covariates were significantly associated with microbial diversity; however, we
                                tive to the Hispanic/Latino group (Figure 2c,d, Supplementary Table S3). Of note, Fuso-
                                 were able to confirm the association between microbial diversity and race and ethnicity
                                bacteriota,  a phylum
                                 (Supplementary         that
                                                    Table    contains
                                                           S5). SimilarFusobacterium   nucleatum,
                                                                        results were observed     a species
                                                                                                 when        consistently
                                                                                                       comparing          associ-
                                                                                                                    gut microbial
                                ated  with  colorectal cancer   pathogenesis  [8], was  significantly higher  among   Black/Afri-
                                 community structure; however, one additional covariate (prior ileostomy) reached statistical
                                can  American(Supplementary
                                 significance   participants compared     to non-Hispanic
                                                                   Table S6).  Finally, whenWhite  participants
                                                                                               we used   a series(Figure 2d; Sup-
                                                                                                                   of models  that
                                plementary    Table S3).
                                 account for socioeconomic, dietary, or treatment covariates; the association between race,
                                      We performed
                                 ethnicity,           all possiblewas
                                            and the microbiota     pairwise  comparisons
                                                                      retained  (Table 2). to search for diﬀerentially abundant
                                ASVs. Compared to Hispanic/Latino participants, Black/African American participants
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                                     11 of 15




                                Table 2. Race/ethnicity is associated with microbial composition even after accounting for patient
                                covariates (Bray–Curtis ordination, term-wise PERMANOVA).

        Category                            Model                          Race/Ethnicity R2          Race/Ethnicity p-Value
             -                  Distance ~ Race and Ethnicity                     0.15                         0.036
                           Distance ~ Insurance + Education + Race
           SES                                                                    0.14                         0.073
                                         and Ethnicity
                          Distance ~ BMI + FruitVeg + WholeGrain +
           Diet                                                                   0.17                         0.029
                             Alcohol + Meat + Race and Ethnicity
                            Distance ~ Ileostomy + Any ostomy +
        Treatment                                                                 0.14                         0.055
                         Radiation + Any surgery + Race and Ethnicity


                                4. Discussion
                                      Our pilot study shows that it is feasible to recruit a diverse sample to participate in
                                studies of CRC and the gut microbiome. Our participation rate (58%) was higher than
                                expected given the many barriers that our patients faced, including illness and pandemic-
                                related restrictions [37]. The racial and ethnic diversity of the study team may have
                                contributed to our recruitment efforts. Furthermore, prior to implementation, we sought
                                input from thought leaders in the field of recruitment on appropriate telephone scripts to
                                capture as diverse a population as possible. However, there was room for improvement in
                                the feasibility and acceptability of the study procedures. Our study relied primarily on chart
                                review of provider schedules which generated a large sampling frame, but from which
                                many patients were excluded due to strict eligibility criteria. We also relied primarily on
                                telephone calls to reach potentially eligible participants which led to high rates of attrition
                                during the recruitment process. In part, this was due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic
                                and restrictions on in-person research during the study period.
                                      Once enrolled, most of our population was able to complete all components, and
                                all returned stool samples were evaluable. Although only those who returned samples
                                did exit interviews, they provided insight into reasons for enrolling and suggestions for
                                improvement. One common issue was that the stool collection process was messy, and
                                instructions could have been clearer. These are both relatively easy issues to address in
                                the future, with the use of larger collection tubes and the incorporation of more patient-
                                friendly collection guides and video (or in-person) demonstrations of sample collection.
                                Several participants also noted that the diet survey was long, and that recall was difficult.
                                Recall bias is certainly a consideration in the analysis of any dietary data, particularly as
                                participants were asked to reflect on their diet for the past month. Simpler and patient-
                                friendly methods of collection such as daily diaries (including photo journals) may address
                                this issue of recall, but conversely, they may not provide the level of granularity necessary
                                to quantify the intake of specific nutrients in relation to the gut microbiota. The type of diet
                                instrument used should ideally strike a balance between minimizing the burden on the
                                study participant but also maximizing the quality of data collected for the desired analysis.
                                      We demonstrated that we can successfully extract DNA and perform microbiota anal-
                                yses from stool samples that relied on patient self-collection in a diverse cohort, setting the
                                stage for larger studies utilizing similar methods. Our study was designed as a recruitment
                                feasibility pilot, and, as such, it was not powered a priori to detect associations between the
                                microbiome and diet, lifestyle, or sociodemographic variables. Despite this limitation, we
                                detected an association between race and ethnicity and the microbiota that was retained
                                even when accounting for potential confounders (prior treatment variables, diet, insurance,
                                and education). Specifically, we found that the Fusobacteriota phylum was more highly
                                abundant in Black/African American individuals, which could contribute to increased
                                CRC development and progression in this group [14,16,17,38]. Interestingly, we also found
                                that prior ileostomy was associated with differences in microbial community structure, in
                                line with prior results from a study of colorectal cancer survivors [36]. Although race and
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                          12 of 15




                         ethnicity-associated differences in the gut microbiome could not be explained by measured
                         treatment, socioeconomic, or dietary covariates, future studies may help untangle the
                         nuances of how treatment and diet impact the microbiota of cancer patients by combining
                         a higher sample size with measurement of detailed surgical history and dietary intake,
                         among other covariates.
                              The main limitation of our study is its small sample size. Recruitment was limited
                         by strict eligibility criteria and reliance on the telephone as the primary mode of contact.
                         Although we sought to recruit equal numbers by race and ethnicity, we were limited by our
                         catchment area, demonstrating the necessity to partner with other clinical sites to ensure
                         the recruitment of diverse populations in the future. In-person recruitment, as well as
                         modifications to remote recruitment, such as the use of voicemail, calling during business
                         hours, flyers, emails, social media, and other direct-to-patient communication methods
                         could be utilized to increase yield in larger studies. In the future, recruitment and consent
                         should occur, if possible, during the same visit/phone call.
                              Although our study excluded patients who had received prior antibiotics, it did in-
                         clude those who had received prior cancer-directed therapy, which may have longer-term
                         effects on the gut microbiome. The primary objective of our pilot was to evaluate the
                         feasibility of recruitment of diverse patients (by race, ethnicity, socioeconomics, and treat-
                         ment history), and as discussed above, it was not powered a priori to detect microbiome
                         differences by race. As such, we chose to include patients who had received prior therapy.
                         Future studies could modify inclusion/exclusion criteria based on the primary objective.
                         To test the effect of prior therapies on the microbiota, future studies could consider in-
                         cluding all patients and stratifying by treatment or antibiotic use. Alternatively, to avoid
                         confounding by prior treatment, studies could restrict the patient population to treatment-
                         naive, new diagnoses only. However, given potentially low CRC case rates at individual
                         hospitals/clinics, strategic partnerships across multiple clinical sites will be essential in
                         recruiting an adequate sample size for a well-powered study in this setting.
                              Also, here, we have presented an analysis of the microbiome of English-fluent patients
                         recruited solely from San Francisco, California, which may have biased findings. Future,
                         larger studies must recruit participants from diverse language backgrounds (e.g., Spanish
                         fluent participants who identify as Hispanic/Latino) and take into account a patient’s
                         environmental and cultural context, and the impact of geography (in the US and globally)
                         on the gut microbiome. Lastly, because the results of our exit interviews were limited to
                         only those participants who completed all study procedures, suggestions and feedback
                         from these participants may not reflect all potential recruitment challenges. Future studies
                         could include brief interviews of individuals who decline participation to provide a richer
                         understanding of the acceptability of the study.

                         5. Conclusions
                              To date, the role of the gut microbiome in CRC disparities remains poorly understood.
                         Our pilot study serves as a first step in further exploring these disparities by establishing
                         the feasibility of home stool microbiome collections in a diverse population of individ-
                         uals recruited from two clinical sites. Despite the small sample size, the study revealed
                         significant differences in the microbial diversity and composition among Black/African
                         American, Hispanic/Latino, and non-Hispanic White, individuals with colorectal cancer.
                         These findings highlight the need to conduct larger longitudinal studies to build on these
                         findings and dissect the mechanisms driving changes in microbial communities and their
                         effects on CRC risk. By understanding factors that shape the gut microbiota and the func-
                         tional consequences in CRC patients, we may be able to develop data-driven strategies to
                         manipulate the microbiota to narrow the gap in the racial and ethnic disparities in CRC
                         incidence and mortality.
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                                                 13 of 15




                                  Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https://www.
                                  mdpi.com/article/10.3390/cancers15184546/s1, Figure S1: Microbiome Disparities Recruitment Script;
                                  Table S1: Recruitment and Enrollment Procedures; Table S2: 16S rRNA gene sequencing depth and
                                  alpha diversity, Table S3: Centered log-ratio transformed abundances of phyla, Table S4: Differentially
                                  abundant amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) from the pairwise comparisons of different races and
                                  ethnicities, Table S5: Microbial diversity is associated with race and ethnicity but not other covariates
                                  (Shannon diversity index, ANOVA test), Table S6: Microbial composition is associated with race and
                                  ethnicity and ileostomy but not other patient covariates (Bray-Curtis ordination, PERMANOVA test).
                                  Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.P., C.E.A. and A.V.; methodology, S.P., A.L.S., E.L.V.B.,
                                  T.N., C.E.A. and A.V.; software, P.J.T.; formal analysis, S.P., T.S.K. and K.T., investigation, S.P., T.S.K.,
                                  K.T., R.V.M., D.S. and K.L.; resources, A.V., P.J.T. and E.L.V.B.; data curation, T.S.K. and K.T.; writing—
                                  original draft preparation, S.P., R.V.M., D.S., T.S.K., A.L.S. and E.L.V.B.; writing—review and editing,
                                  S.P., P.J.T., K.T., T.N. and C.E.A.; supervision, S.P., P.J.T., C.E.A., A.V. and T.N.; visualization, S.P.,
                                  T.S.K., K.T. and A.L.S.; project administration, S.P., funding acquisition, S.P. and P.J.T. All authors
                                  have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                  Funding: This research was funded by the National Institutes of Health (P30AG015272 (UCSF
                                  Center for Aging in Diverse Communities); R01HL122593; F30CA257378; R01CA255116). P.J.T. was
                                  a Chan Zuckerberg Biohub-San Francisco Investigator and a Nadia’s Gift Foundation Innovator
                                  supported in part by the Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation (DRR-42-16). The content is
                                  solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the
                                  funding agencies.
                                  Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
                                  of Helsinki, and approved by the Institutional Review Board (or Ethics Committee) of the University
                                  of California San Francisco (#13-12574 approval: 8 July 2020).
                                  Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all participants involved in
                                  the study.
                                  Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
                                  corresponding author. The data are not publicly available due to patient confidentiality.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. Chloe E. Atreya received research
                                  funding (institution) from Bristol Meyer-Squibb, Erasca, Guardant Health, and Merck. She serves on
                                  the scientific advisory boards for Foundation Medicine, Inivata, Pfizer, Pionyr Immunotherapeutics,
                                  Sumitomo Pharma, and Roche/Genentech. Peter J. Turnbaugh is on the scientific advisory boards for
                                  Pendulum, Seed, and SNIPRbiome; there is no direct overlap between the current study and these
                                  consulting duties.

References
1.    Siegel, R.L.; Miller, K.D.; Fuchs, H.E.; Jemal, A. Cancer statistics, 2022. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2022, 72, 7–33. [CrossRef]
2.    Seigel, R.L.; Ahmedin, J.; Ward, E.M. Increase in incidence of colorectal cancer among young men and women in the United
      States. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 2009, 18, 1695–1698.
3.    Ellis, L.; Abrahao, R.; McKinley, M.; Yang, J.; Somsouk, M.; Marchand, L.L.; Cheng, I.; Gomez, S.L.; Shariff-Marco, S. Colorectal
      Cancer Incidence Trends By Age, Stage, and Racial/Ethnic Group in California 1990-2014. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 2018,
      27, 1011–1018. [CrossRef]
4.    Virostko, J.; Capasso, A.; Yankeelov, T.E.; Goodgame, B. Recent trends in the age at diagnosis of colorectal cancer in the US
      National Cancer Data Base, 2004–2015. Cancer 2019, 125, 3828–3835. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.    Koh, B.; Tan, D.J.H.; Ng, C.H.; Fu, C.E.; Lim, W.H.; Zeng, R.W.; Yong, J.N.; Koh, J.H.; Syn, N.; Meng, W.; et al. Patterns in
      Cancer Incidence Among People Younger Than 50 Years in the US, 2010 to 2019. JAMA Netw. Open 2023, 6, e2328171. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
6.    Ashktorab, H.; Kupfer, S.; Brim, H. Racial Disparity in Gastrointestinal Cancer Risk. Gastroenterology 2017, 153, 910–923. [CrossRef]
7.    Carson, T.L.; Wang, F.; Cui, X.; Jackson, B.E.; Van Der Pol, W.J.; Lefkowitz, E.J.; Morrow, C.; Baskin, M.L. Associations between
      race, perceived psychological stress and gut microbiota in a sample of generally healthy black and white women: A pilot study
      on the role of race and perceived psychological stress. Psychosom. Med. 2018, 80, 640–648. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.    Piawah, S.; Walker, E.J.; Van Blarigan, E.L.; Atreya, C.E. The Gut Microbiome in Colorectal Cancer. Hematol. Oncol. Clin. N. Am.
      2022, 36, 491–506. [CrossRef]
9.    Wong, S.H.; Yu, J. Gut microbiota in colorectal cancer: Mechanisms of action and clinical applications. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol.
      Hepatol. 2019, 16, 690–704. [CrossRef]
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                                                    14 of 15




10.   Bullman, S.J. Interplay between diet, gut microbiota, epigenetic events, and colorectal cancer. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2017,
      61, 1500902. [CrossRef]
11.   Sears, C.L.; Garrett, W.S. Microbes, microbiota, and colon cancer. Cell Host Microbe 2014, 15, 317–328. [CrossRef]
12.   Tjalsma, H.; Boleij, A.; Marchesi, J.R.; Dutilh, B.E. A bacterial driver-passenger model for colorectal cancer: Beyond the usual
      suspects. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2012, 10, 575–582. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   Atreya, C.E.; Turnbaugh, P.J. Probing the tumor micro(b)environment. Science 2020, 368, 938–939. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Brennan, C.A.; Garrett, W.S. Gut Microbiota, Inflammation, and Colorectal Cancer. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2016, 70, 395–411.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.   Garrett, W.S. Cancer and the microbiota. Science 2015, 348, 80–86. [CrossRef]
16.   Castellarin, M.; Warren, R.L.; Freeman, J.D.; Dreolini, L.; Krzywinski, M.; Strauss, J.; Barnes, R.; Watson, P.; Allen-Vercoe, E.;
      Moore, R.A.; et al. Fusobacterium nucleatum infection is prevalent in human colorectal carcinoma. Genome Res. 2012, 22, 299–306.
      [CrossRef]
17.   Kostic, A.D.; Chun, E.; Robertson, L.; Glickman, J.N.; Gallini, C.A.; Michaud, M.; Clancy, T.E.; Chung, D.C.; Lochhead, P.; Hold,
      G.L.; et al. Fusobacterium nucleatum potentiates intestinal tumorigenesis and modulates the tumor-immune microenvironment.
      Cell Host Microbe 2013, 14, 207. [CrossRef]
18.   Liu, W.; Zhang, R.; Shu, R.; Yu, J.; Li, H.; Long, H.; Jin, S.; Li, S.; Hu, Q.; Yao, F.; et al. Study of the Relationship between
      Microbiome and Colorectal Cancer Susceptibility Using 16SrRNA Sequencing. Biomed. Res. Int. 2020, 2020, 7828392. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
19.   Gopalakrishnan, V.; Spencer, C.N.; Nezi, L.; Reuben, A.; Andrews, M.C.; Karpinets, T.V.; Prieto, P.A.; Vicente, D.; Hoffman, K.; Wei,
      S.C.; et al. Gut microbiome modulates response to anti–PD-1 immunotherapy in melanoma patients.Science359,97-103(2018).Gut
      microbiome modulates response to anti–PD-1 immunotherapy in melanoma patients. Science 2017, 359, 97–103. [CrossRef]
20.   Spanogiannopoulos, P.; Kyaw, T.S.; Guthrie, B.G.H. Host and gut bacteria share metabolic pathways for anti-cancer drug
      metabolism. Nat. Microbiol. 2022, 7, 1605–1620. [CrossRef]
21.   De Filippo, C.; Cavalieri, D.; Di Paola, M.; Ramazzotti, M.; Poullet, J.B.; Massart, S.; Collini, S.; Pieraccini, G.; Lionetti, P. Impact of
      diet in shaping gut microbiota revealed by a comparative study in children from Europe and rural Africa. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
      USA 2010, 107, 14691–14696. [CrossRef]
22.   Ang, Q.Y.; Alba, D.L.; Upadhyay, V.; Bisanz, J.E.; Cai, J.; Lee, H.L.; Barajas, E.; Wei, G.; Noecker, C.; Patterson, A.D.; et al. The
      East Asian gut microbiome is distinct from colocalized White subjects and connected to metabolic health. eLife 2021, 10, e70349.
      [CrossRef]
23.   Brooks, A.W.; Priya, S.; Blekhman, R.; Bordenstein, S.R. Gut microbiota diversity across ethnicities in the United States. PLoS Biol.
      2018, 16, e2006842. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Yazici, C.; Wolf, P.G.; Kim, H.; Cross, T.-W.L.; Vermillion, K.; Carroll, T.; Augustus, G.J.; Mutlu, E.; Tussing-Humphreys, L.;
      Braunschweig, C.; et al. Race-dependent association of sulfidogenic bacteria with colorectal cancer. Gut 2017, 66, 1983–1994.
      [CrossRef]
25.   Nguyen, L.H.; Ma, W.; Wang, D.D.; Cao, Y.; Mallick, H.; Gerbaba, T.K.; Lloyd-Price, J.; Abu-Ali, G.; Hall, A.B.; Sikavi, D.;
      et al. Association Between Sulfur-Metabolizing Bacterial Communities in Stool and Risk of Distal Colorectal Cancer in Men.
      Gastroenterology 2020, 158, 1313–1325. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.   Triner, D.; Devenport, S.N.; Ramakrishnan, S.K.; Ma, X.; Frieler, R.A.; Greenson, J.K.; Inohara, N.; Nunez, G.; Colacino, J.A.;
      Mortensen, R.M.; et al. Neutrophils Restrict Tumor-Associated Microbiota to Reduce Growth and Invasion of Colon Tumors in
      Mice. Gastroenterology 2019, 156, 1467–1482. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.   Bullman, S.; Pedamallu, C.S.; Sicinska, E.; Clancy, T.E.; Zhang, X.; Cai, D.; Neuberg, D.; Huang, K.; Guevara, F.; Nelson, T.; et al.
      Analysis of Fusobacterium persistence and antibiotic response in colorectal cancer. Science 2017, 358, 1443–1448. [CrossRef]
28.   Yuan, C.; Spiegelman, D.; Rimm, E.B.; Rosner, B.A.; Stampfer, M.J.; Barnett, J.B.; Chavarro, J.E.; Subar, A.F.; Sampson, L.K.; Willett,
      W.C. Validity of a dietary questionnaire assessed by comparison with multiple weighed dietary records or 24-hour recalls. Am. J.
      Epidemiol. 2017, 185, 570–584. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.   PAHarris RTaylor RThielke JPayne NGonzalez, J.G. Conde, Research electronic data capture (REDCap)—A metadata-driven
      methodology and workflow process for providing translational research informatics support. J. Biomed. Inform. 2009, 42, 377–381.
30.   Harris, P.A.; Taylor, R.; Minor, B.L.; Elliott, V.; Fernandez, M.; O’Neal, L.; McLeod, L.; Delacqua, G.; Delacqua, F.; Kirby, J.; et al.
      REDCap Consortium, The REDCap consortium: Building an international community of software partners. J. Biomed. Inform.
      2019, 95, 103208. [CrossRef]
31.   Everett, C.; Li, C.; Wilkinson, J.E.; Nguyen, L.H.; McIver, L.J.; Ivey, K.; Izard, J.; Palacios, N.; Eliassen, A.H.; Willett, C.W.; et al.
      Overview of the Microbiome Among Nurses study (Micro-N) as an example of prospective characterization of the microbiome
      within cohort studies. Nat. Protoc. 2021, 202116, 2724–2731. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.   Dore, J.; Ehrlich, S.D.; Levenez, F.; Pelletier, E.; Alberti, A.; Bertrand, L.; Bork, P.; Costea, P.I.; Sunagawa, S.; Guarner, F.;
      et al. IHMS_SOP 06 V1: Standard Operating Procedure for Fecal Samples DNA Extraction, Protocol Q. International Human
      Microbiome Standards. 2015. Available online: http://www.microbiome-standards.org (accessed on 10 January 2022).
33.   Bisanz, J. AmpliconSeq Github. Available online: https://github.com/jbisanz/AmpliconSeq (accessed on 31 May 2022).
34.   Bisanz, J. qiime2R: Import qiime2 Artifacts to R. Github. Available online: https://github.com/jbisanz/qiime2R (accessed on 31
      May 2022).
Cancers 2023, 15, 4546                                                                                                            15 of 15




35.   Phyloseq: Explore Microbiome Profiles Using R. Available online: https://joey711.github.io/phyloseq/ (accessed on 31
      May 2022).
36.   Kyaw, T.S.; Upadhyay, V.; Tolstykh, I.; Van Loon, K.; Laffan, A.; Stanfield, D.; Gempis, D.; Kenfield, S.A.; Chan, J.M.; Piawah, S.;
      et al. Variety of fruit and vegetables and alcohol intake are associated with gut microbial species and gene abundance in colorectal
      cancer survivors. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2023, 118, 518–529. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.   Unger, J.M.; Xiao, H.; LeBlanc, M.; Hershman, D.L.; Blanke, C.D. Cancer Clinical Trial Participation at the 1-Year Anniversary of
      the Outbreak of the COVID-19 Pandemic. JAMA Netw. Open 2021, 4, e2118433. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.   Mima, K.; Nishihara, R.; Qian, Z.R.; Cao, Y.; Sukawa, Y.; Nowak, J.A.; Yang, J.; Duo, R.; Masugi, Y.; Song, M.; et al. Fusobacterium
      nucleatum in colorectal carcinoma tissue and patient prognosis. Gut 2016, 65, 1973–1980. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
