Supplementary materials and methods

Study participants and faecal sample collection

  All stool samples and clinical information utilized in this study were collected from

patients at the Department of Gastroenterology, Shenzhen Hospital, Southern Medical

University (Guangdong, China). Patient inclusion criteria include subjects aged > 18

with a diagnosis of RNET defined by endoscopy and histology examinations. None of

these patients used antibiotics, proton pump inhibitors or probiotics at least 3 months

before sample collection. Patients didn’t receive preoperative chemotherapy or

radiotherapy prior to the collection of samples. Healthy group comprise individuals

undergoing colonoscopy for screening for polyp, colorectal cancer, or for physical

examination at local hospitals, or any individuals who were interested to participate in

this study. Participants who have hypertension, diabetes, liver diseases or long-term

medication history were excluded in this study. Fresh samples were frozen in liquid

nitrogen immediately and stored at -80 ℃. All protocols were approved by the Ethic

Committee of Southern Medical University (NYSZYYEC20190013) after obtaining

patients’ informed consent.



Stool sample DNA extraction

  Stool sample DNA was extracted at Novogene Bioinformatics Technology (Beijing,

China) using the SDS method. DNA was subsequently diluted to 1 ng/μl using sterile

ddH2O, and its degradation degree and contamination were assessed on 1% agarose

gels. DNA purity (OD260/OD280) was determined using the NanoDrop Microvolume

Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). DNA concentration was

measured using the Qubit® dsDNA Assay Kit in Qubit® 2.0 Fluorometer (Life

Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA).



Metagenomic shotgun sequencing
  All samples were sequenced on an Illumina platform in PE150 mode at Novogene

Bioinformatics Technology (Beijing, China). Adapter was trimmed and low-quality

reads were filtered using trimmomatic-0.39. Then, host sequences were removed by

aligning sequencing reads back to host genome reference (hg38) using soap2 (version

2.20) when sequence identity exceeds 90% [1].

  Taxonomic profiling of the metagenomic samples was performed using

MetaPhlAn2 [2] which uses clade-specific markers to provide pan-microbial

(bacterial, archaeal, viral and eukaryotic) quantification at species-level. MetaPhlAn2

was run with default parameters.

  At the same time, the high-quality reads were aligned to the updated gut

microbiome gene catalog [3] using SOAP2 (version 2.20) with a threshold of more

than 90% identity and 95% reads length. Gene abundance profile was calculated as

previously described [3]. Next, the relative abundances of KEGG (Kyoto

Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) orthologous (KOs) groups were summed up

from the relative abundances of their respective genes to obtain functional profile.



Bioinformatic analysis

  Alpha diversity was measured by observed counts and Shannon index at gene,

phylum, genus and species level, respectively, with an in-house Perl script.

Bray-Curtis distance was calculated using python module scipy (1.5.1). Principal

component analysis (PCA) was analyzed using R package FactoMineR and factoextra.

Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) was used for visualizing beta diversity using

the Bray-Curtis distance matrix data in R with ggplot2. R packages vegan and ggplot2

was used to analyze and visualize NMDS using Bray-Curtis distance. PERMANOVA

was also analyzed using R package vegan with permutation times of 999. LEfSe

(Linear discriminant analysis Effect Size) was performed with LEfSe (version 1.0)

software to determine the features most likely to explain differences between groups.
Random forest model was built to find biomarkers most likely to be related to BCS

status with R package randomForest and pROC was used to perform ROC analysis on

random forest models.

  Differentially enriched KEGG pathways/modules were identified according to their

reporter score from the Z-scores of individual KOs as previously described [4, 5].

Briefly, a one-tail Wilcoxon rank-sum test was performed on all the KOs that

occurred in more than five samples and adjusted for multiple testing using the

Benjamin-Hochberg procedure. The Z-score for each KO was then calculated. Z-score

of pathway/module background distribution was corrected and used as the final report

score for evaluating the enrichment status. A report score of ≥ 1.96 (95% confidence

according to normal distribution) could be used as a detection threshold for

significantly differentiating pathways.



HUMAnN2 analysis

  Functional profiling was performed by HUMAnN2 [6]. Sample reads are mapped

against this database to quantify gene presence and abundance on a per-species basis.

A translated search is then performed against a UniRef-based protein sequence

catalogue for all reads that fail to map at the nucleotide level. The result are

abundance profiles of gene families (UniRef90s), stratified by each species

contributing those genes, and which can then be summarized to higher-level gene

groupings such as ECs or KOs.



Metabolites Extraction

  20 mg of sample was weighted to an EP tube, and 1000 μL extract solution

(methanol:acetonitrile:water = 2:2:1, with isotopically-labelled internal standard

mixture) was added. Then the samples were homogenized at 35 Hz for 4 min and

sonicated for 5 min in ice-water bath. The homogenization and sonication cycle were
repeated for 3 times. Then the samples were incubated for 1 hr at -40 °C and

centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C. The resulting supernatant was

transferred to a fresh glass vial for analysis. The quality control (QC) sample was

prepared by mixing an equal aliquot of the supernatants from all samples.



LC-MS/MS Analysis

  LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an UHPLC system (Vanquish, Thermo

Fisher Scientific) with a UPLC BEH Amide column (2.1 mm × 100 mm, 1.7 μm)

coupled to Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Orbitrap MS, Thermo). The mobile

phase consisted of 25 mmol/L ammonium acetate and 25 ammonia hydroxide in water

(pH = 9.75) (A) and acetonitrile (B). The auto-sampler temperature was 4 °C, and the

injection volume was 3 μL.

  The QE HFX mass spectrometer was used for its ability to acquire MS/MS spectra

on information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode in the control of the acquisition

software (Xcalibur, Thermo). In this mode, the acquisition software continuously

evaluates the full scan MS spectrum. The ESI source conditions were set as following:

sheath gas flow rate as 30 Arb, Aux gas flow rate as 25 Arb, capillary temperature

350 °C, full MS resolution as 60000, MS/MS resolution as 7500, collision energy as

10/30/60 in NCE mode, spray Voltage as 3.6 kV (positive) or -3.2 kV (negative),

respectively.



Data preprocessing and annotation

  The raw data were converted to the mzXML format using ProteoWizard and

processed with an in-house program, which was developed using R and based on

XCMS, for peak detection, extraction, alignment, and integration. Then an in-house

MS2 database (BiotreeDB) was applied in metabolite annotation. The cutoff for

annotation was set at 0.3.
Correlation between genus and species in each group by FastSpar

  Microbial association (genus and species level) in each group was determined by

FastSpar, a fast and parallelizable implementation of the SparCC algorithm with an

unbiased P-value estimator [7]. We selected the significantly different genus and

species between RNET and control groups (p < 0.05). FastSpar has been widely used

to estimate the correlation values from compositional data. Significant co-occurrence

and co-excluding interaction (FastSpar correlation scores roh < −0.2 or roh > 0.2, p <

0.05) were visualized and analyzed using igraph. We calculated the degree,

betweenness and strength of each node to estimate its importance to the network.



Correlation analysis of gut microbial species and metabolites

  We selected gut microbial species discriminately enriched in RNET or control

groups by LEfSe analysis (LEfSe: LDA > 2.0, p < 0.05). Significantly abundant

metabolites were defined as log2 Fold change (FC) > 1 or < -1, p <0.05, q < 0.05.

Consequently, 23 metabolites were included. Spearman’s correlation of differentially

enriched species and metabolites was calculated using the scipy-stats package. Heat

maps were hierarchically clustered to represent the species-metabolite-associated

patterns based on the correlation distance. All analyses and visualizations were

implemented in python (v2.7.9) with the numpy (v1.9.2), scipy (v0.15.1), and

matplotlib (v1.4.3) packages.



Statistical analysis

  We performed Wilcoxon rank-sum test (two-tailed) for the difference of α diversity

and permutation multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) test for the

difference of β diversity between the two compared groups. Spearman correlation

analysis between differential enriched features were performed. To evaluate and
deconfound the effects of gender, age, BMI, smoking and alcohol consumption,

multivariate     association    with    linear    models      algorithm     (MaAsLin2,

http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/maaslin) was used for multivariable association

testing between phenotypes and microbial taxonomy or functional characters with

default parameters. Unless otherwise stated, all statistical analyses were made in the R

software and P values < 0.05 were considered as statistically significant level.



Reference

1   Qin J, Li Y, Cai Z, Li S, Zhu J, Zhang F, et al. A metagenome-wide association

study of gut microbiota in type 2 diabetes. Nature 2012;490:55-60.

2   Truong DT, Franzosa EA, Tickle TL, Scholz M, Weingart G, Pasolli E, et al.

MetaPhlAn2 for enhanced metagenomic taxonomic profiling. Nat Methods

2015;12:902-3.

3   Li J, Jia H, Cai X, Zhong H, Feng Q, Sunagawa S, et al. An integrated catalog of

reference genes in the human gut microbiome. Nat Biotechnol 2014;32:834-41.

4   Patil KR, Nielsen J. Uncovering transcriptional regulation of metabolism by

using metabolic network topology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:2685-9.

5   Feng Q, Liang S, Jia H, Stadlmayr A, Tang L, Lan Z, et al. Gut microbiome

development along the colorectal adenoma-carcinoma sequence. Nat Commun

2015;6:6528.

6   Franzosa EA, McIver LJ, Rahnavard G, Thompson LR, Schirmer M, Weingart G,

et al. Species-level functional profiling of metagenomes and metatranscriptomes. Nat

Methods 2018;15:962-8.

7   Watts SC, Ritchie SC, Inouye M, Holt KE. FastSpar: rapid and scalable

correlation estimation for compositional data. Bioinformatics 2019;35:1064-6.



Supplementary Figure legends
Figure S1 (A) Representative images for 18 RNET patients (Colonoscopy and H&E

histological pictures) and 40 healthy individuals (Colonoscopy pictures) in the

discovery cohort were presented. (B) Distribution of BMI, age, Brinkman index

(smoking) and alcohol consumption in 58 subjects (40 healthy individuals, 18 RNET)

were calculated. The dot represents one value from individual participants. Lines in

the boxes indicate medians, the width of the notches is the IQR, the lowest and

highest values within 1.5 times the IQR from the first and third quartiles. p values

were calculated by two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test.



Figure S2 (A-C) Gut microbial structures in RNET patients and healthy participants

were evaluated by Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Principal Coordinates

analysis (PCoA) and Nonmetric MultiDimensional Scaling (NMDS) at the phylum

(A), genus (B), and species (C) levels, respectively, based on the metagenomic data.

(D) ANOSIM test was applied to compare microbial structure dissimilarity between

and within groups (two-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test).



Figure S3 641 microbial species in RNET and control groups detected by

metagenomic sequencing were normalized, centered, clustered, and presented by

heatmap.



Figure S4 (A) Enriched species either in RNET or control group were presented by

LEfSe bar plots, which were interpreted by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) scores

(Logarithmic LDA score > 2.0, p < 0.05 were considered a significant difference in

bacterial abundance between groups). (B) Co-occurrence (Orange) and co-excluding

(Green) relationships between bacterial genera in Control and RNET groups. FastSpar

correlation coefficients were indicated by edge width (roh < −0.2 or roh > 0.2, p <

0.05). Nodes’ size (Control: blue; RNET: dark red) were scaled based on the relative
abundance of each genus in either RNET or Control group.



Figure S5 The top 27 KEGG modules differentially abundant in control group and 3

KEGG modules enriched in RNET patients were annotated by the HUMAnN2

pipeline (p < 0.05 was considered as statistical significance, two-sided wilcoxon

rank-sum test). Modules overlapped with those annotated by our in-house pipeline

were marked with red asterisk (*).



Figure S6 (A) The orthogonal projections to latent structures-discriminant analysis

(OPLS-DA) were applied to assess the quantitative variation in the metabolites

between RNET and control groups. p values were calculated by two-sided Wilcoxon

rank sum test. ANOSIM, R = 0.149, p = 0.026. (B) Metabolic compounds were

assigned to putative molecular superclasses based on comparisons with the Human

Metabolome Database (HMDB). Relative abundance of faecal molecular superclasses

showed significant difference between RNET patients and healthy individuals. N

represents the number of metabolites in each superclass (two-sided wilcoxon

rank-sum test). (C) The number of class members in lipid and lipid-like molecules

were presented.



Figure S7 545 faecal metabolites in RNET and control groups detected by

metabonomic profiling were normalized, centered, clustered, and presented by

heatmap.



Table S1 Participants’ clinical information in the discovery cohort.



Table S2 Bacterial β-diversity calculated by PERMANOVA with Bray-Curtis

distance.
Table S3 IGC-based gene count analysis adjusted by clinical parameters.



Table S4 MetaPhlAn2-based α-diversity analysis adjusted by clinical parameters.



Table S5 Bacterial β-diversity adjusted by clinical parameters.



Table S6 Metabolic bray-Curtis similarities adjusted by clinical parameters.



Table S7 Microbial and metabolic based classifiers adjusted by clinical parameters.
