              microorganisms

Article
Colorectal Cancer Stage-Specific Fecal Bacterial Community
Fingerprinting of the Taiwanese Population and Underpinning
of Potential Taxonomic Biomarkers
Chuan-Yin Fang 1,† , Jung-Sheng Chen 2,† , Bing-Mu Hsu 3,4, * , Bashir Hussain 3,5,† , Jagat Rathod 6 and
Kuo-Hsin Lee 7,8

                                          1   Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chia-Yi Christian Hospital,
                                              Chiayi 621, Taiwan; 04969@cych.org.tw
                                          2   Department of Medical Research, E-Da Hospital, Kaohsiung 824, Taiwan; nicky071214@gmail.com
                                          3   Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, National Chung Cheng University, Chiayi 621, Taiwan;
                                              bashir.aku@gmail.com
                                          4   Center for Innovative on Aging Society (CIRAS), National Chung Cheng University, Chiayi 621, Taiwan
                                          5   Department of Biomedical Sciences, National Chung Cheng University, Chiayi 621, Taiwan
                                          6   Department of Earth Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan; jagat2006@gmail.com
                                          7   Department of Emergency Medicine, E-Da Hospital, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung 824, Taiwan;
                                              peter1055@gmail.com
                                          8   School of Medicine, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung 824, Taiwan
                                          *   Correspondence: bmhsu@ccu.edu.tw; Tel.: +886-52720411 (ext. 66218)
                                          †   Equal contribution to this work.
         
         
                                          Abstract: Despite advances in the characterization of colorectal cancer (CRC), it still faces a poor
Citation: Fang, C.-Y.; Chen, J.-S.;
Hsu, B.-M.; Hussain, B.; Rathod, J.;
                                          prognosis. There is growing evidence that gut microbiota and their metabolites potentially contribute
Lee, K.-H. Colorectal Cancer              to the development of CRC. Thus, microbial dysbiosis and their metabolites associated with CRC,
Stage-Specific Fecal Bacterial            based on stool samples, may be used to advantage to provide an excellent opportunity to find
Community Fingerprinting of the           possible biomarkers for the screening, early detection, prevention, and treatment of CRC. Using 16S
Taiwanese Population and                  rRNA amplicon sequencing coupled with statistical analysis, this study analyzed the cause–effect
Underpinning of Potential Taxonomic       shift of the microbial taxa and their metabolites that was associated with the fecal gut microbiota of
Biomarkers. Microorganisms 2021, 9,       17 healthy controls, 21 polyps patients, and 21 cancer patients. The microbial taxonomic shift analysis
1548. https://doi.org/10.3390/            revealed striking differences among the healthy control, polyps and cancer groups. At the phylum
microorganisms9081548
                                          level, Synergistetes was reduced significantly in the polyps group compared to the healthy control
                                          and cancer group. Additionally, at the genus level and in association with the cancer group, a total of
Academic Editor: Kyunam Kim
                                          12 genera were highly enriched in abundance. In contrast, only Oscillosprira was significantly higher
                                          in abundance in the healthy control group. Comparisons of the polyps and cancer groups showed
Received: 14 June 2021
Accepted: 18 July 2021
                                          a total of 18 significantly enriched genera. Among them, 78% of the genera associated with the
Published: 21 July 2021                   cancer group were in higher abundance, whereas the remaining genera showed a higher abundance
                                          in the polyps group. Additionally, the comparison of healthy control and polyp groups showed
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral      six significantly abundant genera. More than 66% of these genera showed a reduced abundance in
with regard to jurisdictional claims in   the polyps group than in healthy controls, whereas the remaining genera were highly abundant in
published maps and institutional affil-   the polyps group. Based on tumor presence and absence, the abundance of Olsenella and Lactobacillus
iations.                                  at the genus level was significantly reduced in the patient group compared to healthy controls. The
                                          significant microbial function prediction revealed an increase in the abundance of metabolites in the
                                          polyps and cancer groups compared to healthy controls. A correlation analysis revealed a higher
                                          contribution of Dorea in the predicted functions. This study showed dysbiosis of gut microbiota at the
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.         taxonomic level and their metabolic functions among healthy subjects and in two stages of colorectal
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.        cancer, including adenoma and adenocarcinoma, which might serve as potential biomarkers for the
This article is an open access article    early diagnosis and treatment of CRC.
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons        Keywords: colorectal cancer; gut microbiota; gut microbial dysbiosis; prognosis; biomarker; metage-
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                          nomics; functional predictions
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).




Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms9081548                        https://www.mdpi.com/journal/microorganisms
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                            2 of 20




                               1. Introduction
                                     Colorectal cancer (CRC), also known as colorectal adenocarcinoma, is considered the
                               second most leading cause of cancer-related mortality and is responsible for more than
                               1.3 million new cases per annum [1,2]. Such a growing rate of incidence makes it the
                               most prevalent and significant health issue on a global scale. Generally, CRC arises from
                               certain epithelial cells of the large intestine following a series of genetic and epigenetic
                               perturbations. Subsequently, normal epithelial cells transform into adenomas (benign
                               neoplasms or polyps) followed by invasive carcinomas [3,4]. Several risk factors including
                               dietary habits (less fiber/excessive red meat), smoking, obesity, alcohol consumption, and
                               diabetes have been linked to the initiation and progression of CRC [4–6]. Additionally,
                               in recent years there have been cumulative reports finding the possible envelopment of
                               human gut microbiota in CRC carcinogenesis [7,8].
                                     The human gastrointestinal tract, especially the colon, harbors a diversified microbial
                               community ranging from 1013 –1014 microorganisms [9]. These microbes are primarily
                               dominated by bacteria as the core microbiota in the gut of healthy people, with obligate
                               anaerobes, mainly Bacteroides, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria Actinobacteria, and Verrucomicro-
                               bia comprising 95% of gut microbiota [10,11]. The gut microbiota performs a variety of
                               crucial functions that help the host in protection from pathogens, nutrient supply, im-
                               mune modulation, and shaping the intestinal epithelium [10,12]. Previous studies have
                               shown that various gut microbiota and their associated metabolites exhibit proinflamma-
                               tory and procarcinogenic properties which ultimately exert a great impact on colorectal
                               carcinogenesis [13–15].
                                     After the advent of high throughput sequencing, the interest in the relationship be-
                               tween cancer and intestinal microbiota has rapidly grown in recent years. High throughput
                               sequencing has made many efforts to unveil the characterization, association, and func-
                               tional prediction of gut microbiota in healthy and diseased subjects [16,17]. There are
                               substantial reports, both in animal and human models, that suggest any alterations in
                               microbial community structures greatly influence the colon health condition, leading to
                               various intestinal disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease, diabetes, obesity, and
                               various type of cancer, particularly colorectal cancer [14,17,18]. Other reports of CRCs have
                               suggested the existence of linkages between gut microbiota and their metabolites in tumor
                               initiation and progression in a murine colitis-associated CRC model [18,19]. Additionally,
                               several reports highlighted evidence of fecal microbiota associated with CRC as being
                               tumorigenic in germ-free mice models [20,21].
                                     Previous studies have revealed that the intestinal mucosa and fecal flora are different
                               in patients with colorectal cancer [15,22]. In the stool of healthy people, a higher bacterial
                               diversity has been observed as compared to the stool of patients with colorectal cancer [23].
                               However, it has been observed that the bacterial diversity on the mucosa close to cancer
                               cells is relatively low in the healthy person, whereas increased bacterial diversity is noticed
                               in colorectal cancer patients [17]. Additionally, the overall structure of lumen noncancer-
                               ous and cancerous microbiota found that a lower diversity was exhibited in similar but
                               cancerous tissue [8]. The relative abundance of dominant phyla including Firmicutes, Bac-
                               teroidetes, Proteobacteria, and Fusobacteria have been observed differently in both healthy
                               control and CRC patients [24]. In particular, Fusobacteria and Proteobacteria were more
                               abundant in cancer specimens, whereas a significantly higher abundance of Fusobacteria
                               and Firmicutes were observed in the stools of a colorectal patient [18]. According to recent
                               studies, Peptosteptococcus, Clostridium, Prutella, Porphyromonas, and Bacteroides are the key
                               bacteria linked with colorectal cancer [1]. Additionally, some other bacteria are currently
                               considered to be linked with colorectal cancer, such as Streptococcus bovis, a Gram-positive
                               opportunistic pathogen having the ability to grow in a 40% bile environment and cause
                               systemic infections in the human body [25]. Similarly, other common bacteria of the human
                               gut, such as Streptococcus gallolyticus and Helicobacter pylori, are believed to be involved
                               in colorectal cancer [26]. Moreover, certain strains of Escherichia coli producing a toxin
                               such as cyclomodulin, are also believed to be involved in the carcinogenesis of CRC [7].
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                           3 of 20




                               Additionally, mice infected with a certain strain of E. coli have displayed a marked increase
                               in the number of visible colonic polyps as compared to controls [27]. Previous reports also
                               highlighted a profound shift of bacterial groups, less common or more common, in healthy
                               subjects and CRC [23,28,29].
                                    Additionally, it has been reported that gut microbial-associated metabolites are not
                               only helpful in the maintenance of human gut health, but they also play a key role in the
                               development of CRC [28,30]. There are substantial reports that the general gut microbiota
                               is associated with the initiation and progression of CRC through the production of car-
                               cinogens, cocarcinogens, or procarcinogen substances [29]. The direct interaction of gut
                               microbes with the epithelial cells is limited due to the presence of mucosal barriers [31].
                               However, these microbes convert the complex chemicals provided by the host and dietary
                               nutrients into a milieu metabolite which can be easily translocated across the mucosal
                               barrier and play a role in tumorigenesis through multiple mechanisms, such as modifying
                               signaling proteins [28,31]. In previous studies, it has been demonstrated that the elevated
                               gut microbes derived from secondary bile acids, such as deoxycholic acid, promote the
                               development and progression of CRC [32,33]. Contrarily, the decreased level of beneficial
                               gut microbial-associated metabolites, such as butyrate, is also involved in mutagenesis [34].
                               Additionally, gut microbiota-associated reductive and hydrolytic enzymes also play roles
                               in the occurrence of CRC [35].
                                    Thus, taking advantage of the shift in microbial taxa and their metabolites in CRC
                               patient stool samples may provide an excellent opportunity to find possible biomarkers for
                               the screening, early detection, prevention, and treatment of CRC. Ultimately this will help
                               in the reduction of CRC-associated death globally. Therefore, in this study, we performed
                               amplicon sequencing of 16S rRNA genes based on high throughput sequencing to analyze
                               the overall bacterial compositions and their functional predictions that were associated
                               with the human gut microbiota of healthy subjects, polyps, and cancer patients to find
                               potential biomarkers associated with CRC.

                               2. Materials and Methods
                               2.1. Characteristics of Patients and Healthy Participants
                                     In this study, a total of 17 healthy subjects were selected as a control group. Subjects
                               were aged 25–95 years old (both male and female) with no acute and chronic gastrointestinal
                               diseases and no antibiotic administration history within a one-month period prior to sample
                               collection. Similarly, 21 persons aged 25–95 years old (both male and female) with large
                               intestine tumor symptoms were divided into polyps and bowel cancer patients. After
                               radiography examination, patients with colorectal cancer were at a T and L level, based on
                               the TNM classification standard as previously described [18]. After diagnosis, these
                               patients had not been treated with chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Besides, for both the
                               control and the experimental groups the following conditions were excluded: (1) obesity,
                               pregnancy, high blood pressure, stroke, myocardial infarction, diabetes, hyperlipidemia,
                               gout, long-term lying, patients with primary and secondary parathyroid hyperthyroidism;
                               (2) drugs, alcohol, and drug abuse; (3) taking drugs (antibiotics, constipation drugs) or food
                               (probiotics) in the preceding month that could affect the gastrointestinal tract. Sample
                               collections were conducted according to the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki and
                               approved by the Institutional Review Board of Ditmanson Chia—Yi Christian Hospital,
                               Taiwan (CYCH-IRB No. 2019021 and date of approval: 11 April 2019).

                               2.2. Sample Collection and DNA Extraction
                                    The fecal specimens of healthy subjects and patients with colorectal cancer and polyps
                               were collected in a sterile stool box with cryopreservation at Chiayi Christian Hospital,
                               Taiwan. Samples were then transported following the biosafety procedures and under
                               controlled temperature conditions to the laboratory at National Chung Cheng University,
                               Taiwan. Fecal gDNA was extracted from a 200 mg stool sample using a QIAamp DNA
                               Stool Mini Kit (QIAGEN) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Additionally, a bead-
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                             4 of 20




                               beating step was performed using a previously designed protocol [36]. In brief, 250 µL
                               of the stool sample was taken in a 2 mL sterilized tube holding 1.2 mL ASL lysis buffer
                               along with 0.3 g sterile 0.1 mm zirconia beads (BioSpec, Bartlesville, OK, USA) and this was
                               followed by vortex-mixing for 2 min. The samples were subjected to heating for 15 min
                               at 95 ◦ C and subsequently homogenized using the Qiagen TissueLyser II. After treatment
                               with an InhibitEX Tablet, 350 µL of supernatant was shifted to another tube to perform the
                               subsequent purification steps using a QIAcube system.
                                    The purity and concentration of the extracted gDNA was determined using a Nan-
                               odrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Wilmington, DE, USA) at
                               230–280 nm. The quality of the gDNA was examined using gel electrophoresis (1.5% gel in
                               Tris-acetate ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid buffer) at 110 V for 30 min. The DNA bands
                               were visualized under ultraviolet light. The purified gDNA was stored at −20 ◦ C for
                               further analysis.

                               2.3. Sequencing, Library Construction, and 16S rRNA Amplicon Data Analysis
                                    We amplified the V3–V4 region of the hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene
                               from the extracted gDNA using 341F and 805R primer sets (with some modifications)
                               with the Illumina adapter overhang sequence attached at the 50 end of the primers. The
                               sequences of the forward primers used in this experiment were as follows: (16S_341F) 50 -
                               TCGTCGGCAGCGTCAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGCCTACGGGNGGCWG CAG-30 ,
                               (16S_341F _N) 50 -TCGTCGGCAGCGTCAGATGTGTATAAGAGAC AGnCCTACGGGN
                               GGCWGCAG-30 , (16S_341F _N N) 50 -TCGTCGGCAGCGTCAG ATGTGTATAAGAGAC
                               AGnnCCTACGGGNGGC WGCAG-30 , and (16S_341F _NNN) 50 -TCGTCGGCAGCGTCA
                               GATGTGTATAAGAGACAGnnnCCTACGGGNGG CWGCAG-30 . The reverse primer se-
                               quences were as follows: (16S_805R) 50 -GTCTCGTGGGCTCGGAGATGTGTATAAGAG
                               ACAGGACTACHVGGGTA TCT AATCC-30 , (16S_805R _N_) 50 -GTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
                               AGATGTGTATAAGAGA CAGnGACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-30 , (16S_805R _NN) 50 -
                               GTCTCGTGGGC TCGGAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGnnGACTACHVGGGTATCTAA
                               TCC-30 , and (16S_805R _NNN) 50 -GTCTCGTGGGCTCGGAGATGTGTATAAGAGAC
                               AG nnnGACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-30 . The amplification was performed in triplicate,
                               following the previously reported method [37]. The optimal PCR conditions were as fol-
                               lows: 95 ◦ C for 3 min, followed by 30 cycles of 95 ◦ C for 30 s (denaturation), 55 ◦ C for 30 s
                               (annealing), 72 ◦ C for 30 s (primer extension), and 72 ◦ C for 5 min (elongation). The quantity
                               and quality of amplified DNA were assessed using the standard quality checks mentioned
                               above. Next, the amplicons (20 µL) from each sample were subjected to sequencing using
                               the pair-end method with the MiSeq Illumina platform (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA)
                               following the standard protocol at the National Yang-Ming University Genome Research
                               Center, Taiwan. The DNA libraries were ligated with the sequencing adapters and index
                               using the Nextera XT sample preparation kit (Illumina), following the manufacturer’s
                               instructions. The sequence data containing reverse and forward reads were aligned using
                               the CLC bio plate form (Genomic Workbench v.8.5) and the FASTA files were generated
                               as described in our previous study [38]. The QIIME2 system was used for the sequence
                               quality control and amplicon sequence variant (ASV)-based classification [39]. In brief, the
                               quality of raw sequencing reads was assessed by FastQC. DADA2 was used for denoising
                               and constructing ASVs. The denoising steps also included the truncation of the forward
                               (250–280 bp) and reversed reads (180–260 bp) based upon the quality profile and amplicon
                               length which was performed by using DADA2. The minimum and maximum number
                               of quality count reads was 4500 and 37,432 per sample, respectively. The rarefaction was
                               performed at 4300 read counts to estimate the bacterial diversity. Finally, the relative
                               abundance of microbes at the phylum and genus levels in each sample was obtained using
                               the QIIME2 view. Furthermore, the significant difference in the relative abundance at the
                               phylum and genus level in each group was analyzed using statistical analysis of taxonomic
                               and functional profiles (STAMP) software [40]. The significant relative abundance at the
                               phylum and genus level was examined using a two-tailed White’s non-parametric t-test
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                           5 of 20




                               (p < 0.05). Additionally, the linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) was performed
                               in Galaxy software (http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/lefse/, accessed on 6 July 2021)
                               following an LDA score > 2 and p < 0.05 to identify the differential abundance in microbiota
                               among the experimental groups [41]. To know the significance among the clustering pattern
                               in the ordination plot, a permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA)
                               was performed using MicrobiomeAnalyst, based on the experimental groups [42].

                               2.4. Metagenomic Functional Prediction Based on 16S rRNA Gene Data
                                    To examine the potential metabolic function of microorganisms in each sample be-
                               longing to healthy control, polyps, and CRC patients, the representative sequence and
                               denoised ASV abundance tables were used. These tables were input into the phylogenetic
                               investigation of communities reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt2) pipeline
                               (https://github.com/picrust/picrust2, accessed on 29 December 2020) using KEGG (Ky-
                               oto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes). All ASVs with a nearest-sequenced taxon index
                               (cutoff value > 2) were removed by default for the reliable annotation of metabolic functions
                               using the KEGG reference database as previously described [43]. Finally, using White’s
                               nonparametric t-test in STAMP software (p < 0.05) with 95% confidence intervals, the
                               results of level 2 KEGG pathways were used to ascertain the significant shift in the bacterial
                               community in each group. A Spearman correlation analysis was performed using IBM
                               SPSS Statistics 24 (IBM, Armonk and North Castle, NY, USA) to evaluate the significant
                               correlations between bacterial diversity and the potential functional prediction, considering
                               p-values in the range 0.01–0.05.

                               3. Results
                               3.1. Gut Microbial Richness and Diversity with Respect to Health Conditions and Based on 16S
                               rRNA Amplicon Sequencing
                                     In order to study bacterial community composition in each stage of CRC and in
                               healthy controls, we performed 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing targeting the V3 and V4
                               regions, which after quality filtering and chimera removal generated a total of 1919 ASVs,
                               based on a 97% cutoff value using the reference database (Greengenes). As shown in
                               Figure 1A, among these, compared to healthy controls (n = 621), the cancer group (n = 901)
                               exhibited a higher ASV number, followed by the polyps group (n = 800). Additionally,
                               107 ASVs were common among the three experimental groups, while the majority were still
                               unique to each experimental group (413 for healthy controls, 549 for the polyps group, and
                               661 for the cancer group), revealing, compared to healthy controls, a higher unique ASV
                               diversity in the cancer group followed by the polyps group. Additionally, the richness and
                               diversity of the gut microbial community in each experimental group was evaluated using
                               Chao1 (Figure 1B), Simpson (Figure 1C) and Shannon (Figure 1D) alpha diversity indices,
                               revealing a higher alpha diversity in the cancer group compared to the healthy controls,
                               but the difference was not statistically significant. The beta diversity analysis based on
                               a weighted UniFrac distance matrix showed a low variation in microbial diversity and
                               as a result no clustering patterns were noted among the experimental groups (Figure 1E).
                               Additionally, the significance analysis of clustering patterns in the ordination plot was
                               evaluated using PERMANOVA analysis (F-value: 0.9726; R-square: 0.072337; p < 0.525)
                               which revealed no significant variation in beta diversity among the experimental groups.
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                                                 6 of 20
  Microorganisms 2021, 9, x                                                                                                             6 of 20




        Figure
      Figure 1. 1.Venn   diagram(A)
                    Venndiagram         representing the
                                   (A)representing   the shared
                                                         shared and
                                                                and unique
                                                                     uniqueASVs
                                                                            ASVsamong
                                                                                 amongthethethree experimental
                                                                                              three            groups.
                                                                                                    experimental        Boxplots
                                                                                                                  groups.   Boxplots
        showing    alpha diversity ((B) Chao1, (C) Shannon,  and (D)
      showing alpha diversity ((B) Chao1, (C) Shannon, and (D) Simpson) among the experimental groups. PCoA showing
                                                                     Simpson) among the experimental  groups. PCoA  (E) (E) showing
        the bacterial beta diversity among the experimental groups based on weighted UniFrac distances.
      the bacterial beta diversity among the experimental groups based on weighted UniFrac distances.

                                   3.2. Gut Microbial Compositions and Abundance with Respect to the Healthy Condition and
                                  3.2.
                                   BasedGut
                                          on Microbial
                                              16S rRNACompositions         and Abundance with Respect to the Healthy Condition and
                                                           Amplicon Sequencing
                                  Based on 16S rRNA Amplicon Sequencing
                                         For the subsequent analysis, the annotated ASVs yielded a total of 11 classifiable
                                         For the subsequent analysis, the annotated ASVs yielded a total of 11 classifiable phyla
                                   phyla (Figure 2A) and 85 genera (Figure 2B). Firmicutes, Bacteroides, and Proteobacteria
                                  (Figure    2A) and 85 genera (Figure 2B). Firmicutes, Bacteroides, and Proteobacteria were
                                   were the top three predominant phyla in the three experimental groups. Additionally,
                                  the  top
                                   compared  three    predominant
                                                 to the control group, phyla   in the three
                                                                          the abundance        experimental
                                                                                            rate                 groups.
                                                                                                 of observed phyla      suchAdditionally,
                                                                                                                               as Euryarchae-com-
                                  pared    to the control
                                   ota, Fusobacteria,        group, the abundance
                                                          Lentisphaerae,                  rate of observed
                                                                             and Proteobacteria                phyla in
                                                                                                    was increased       such
                                                                                                                           the as Euryarchaeota,
                                                                                                                                cancer   group,
                                  Fusobacteria,
                                   followed by the polyps group. The top three dominant bacteria in abundance at thegroup,
                                                      Lentisphaerae,      and  Proteobacteria      was   increased    in  the  cancer     genus fol-
                                  lowed     by  the   polyps   group.   The   top  three  dominant      bacteria  in  abundance
                                   level were Bacteroides, Alistipes, and Roseburia associated with the control group, and Bac-       at the genus
                                   teroides, Clostridium, and Prevotella in the polyps group, whereas Bacteroides, Clostridium, Bac-
                                  level   were    Bacteroides,  Alistipes,  and   Roseburia   associated    with  the   control   group,   and
                                  teroides,  Clostridium,
                                   and Butyricimonas              Prevotella in
                                                            andassociated
                                                          were                   thecancer
                                                                               with   polypspatients,
                                                                                               group, whereas     Bacteroides,
                                                                                                         sequentially    accordingClostridium,
                                                                                                                                      to higherand
                                  Butyricimonas
                                   abundance. There were 15 genera observed only in the cancer group, such as higher
                                                      were  associated    with  cancer   patients,  sequentially     according    to  Methano- abun-
                                  dance.    There    were  15  genera   observed    only  in the cancer    group,   such   as Methanobrevibacter,
                                   brevibacter, Coxiella, Actinomyces, Coriobacterium, Paraeggerthella, Slackia, Porphyromonas,
                                  Coxiella,   Actinomyces,
                                   Vestibaculum,               Coriobacterium,
                                                     Abiotrophia,                  Paraeggerthella,
                                                                    Leuconostoc, weissella,            Slackia, Porphyromonas,
                                                                                              Peptostreptococcus,                    Vestibaculum,
                                                                                                                    Bulleidia, Cloacibacillus,
                                  Abiotrophia,
                                   and             Leuconostoc,
                                         Haloferula.              weissella,
                                                       Furthermore,           Peptostreptococcus,
                                                                        seven genera                 Bulleidia,
                                                                                         were observed           Cloacibacillus,
                                                                                                           in both the                   Haloferula.
                                                                                                                          polyps and cancer
                                  Furthermore,
                                   groups,    but notseven  genera were
                                                       in healthy           observed in
                                                                    controls. The           both of
                                                                                    abundance     thethese
                                                                                                       polyps   and cancer
                                                                                                            genera             groups,
                                                                                                                     increased or         but not in
                                                                                                                                     remained
                                  healthy
                                   the        controls.
                                        same in           The group
                                                   the cancer   abundance      of these
                                                                        compared          genera
                                                                                     to the polyps    group, or
                                                                                                   increased  which    includedthe
                                                                                                                    remained           same
                                                                                                                                   Rothia,    in the
                                                                                                                                            Ato-
                                  cancer
                                   pobium,group      compared to
                                             Coprococcus,            the polyps
                                                             Anaerotruncus,       group, which
                                                                               Sporobacter,        included
                                                                                             Limnobacter,   andRothia,   Atopobium,
                                                                                                                 Acinetobacter.        Coprococcus,
                                                                                                                                   In compar-
                                   ison  with the control
                                  Anaerotruncus,              group, there
                                                       Sporobacter,          were five
                                                                      Limnobacter,    andgenera   with
                                                                                           Acinetobacter.increased
                                                                                                             In      abundance
                                                                                                                comparison       with   thecan-
                                                                                                                                    in the  control
                                   cer andthere
                                  group,     polyps    groups,
                                                    were         which with
                                                          five genera    included,   Eggerthella,
                                                                                increased          Butyricimonas,
                                                                                             abundance               Streptococcus,
                                                                                                           in the cancer     and polypsDefluvii-
                                                                                                                                            groups,
                                  whichand
                                   talea,      Ruminococcus.
                                            included,             On the contrary,
                                                         Eggerthella,   Butyricimonas,eight genera,   namely,
                                                                                           Streptococcus,       Bifidobacterium,
                                                                                                            Defluviitalea,    and Macellibac-
                                                                                                                                    Ruminococcus.
                                   teroides,  Alistipes, Odoribacter,  Paenibacillus,   Oscillospira, Selenomonas,    WAL_1855D,
                                  On the contrary, eight genera, namely, Bifidobacterium, Macellibacteroides, Alistipes,               showed
                                                                                                                                           Odoribac-
                                   a decreased     abundance     in the cancer   and  polyps   group   as compared     to
                                  ter, Paenibacillus, Oscillospira, Selenomonas, WAL_1855D, showed a decreased abundance   the control   group. in
                                  the cancer and polyps group as compared to the control group.
   Microorganisms 2021, 9, x                                                                                                  7 of 20


Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                                     7 of 20




      Figure
         Figure      rRNA
                16S16S
             2. 2.     rRNA  amplicon
                              ampliconsequencing-based
                                        sequencing-based relative abundancesofofmicrobial
                                                         relative abundances    microbialdiversity
                                                                                          diversityat at
                                                                                                      thethe phylum
                                                                                                           phylum           andand
                                                                                                                        (A)(A)
                                                                                                                     level
                                                                                                                  level
         genus level (B) in each experimental group.
      genus level (B) in each experimental group.

                                  3.3. Distribution of Firmicutes and Bacteroides Ratios among Experimental Groups
                                        To further explore the microbial dysbiosis, we checked the Firmicutes and Bacteroides
                                  ratio as a marker in experimental groups, as shown in Supplementary Figure S1. The
                                  Firmicutes/Bacteroides ratio was observed to be significantly higher in the cancer group
                                  (1.9) followed by the polyps group (1.6) as compared to healthy controls (1.4).
                               3.3. Distribution of Firmicutes and Bacteroides Ratios among Experimental Groups
                                    To further explore the microbial dysbiosis, we checked the Firmicutes and Bac-
                               teroides ratio as a marker in experimental groups, as shown in Supplementary Figure S1.
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                       8 of 20
                               The Firmicutes/Bacteroides ratio was observed to be significantly higher in the cancer
                               group (1.9) followed by the polyps group (1.6) as compared to healthy controls (1.4).

                               3.4.
                               3.4. Differential
                                    Differential Abundance
                                                  Abundance of of Bacterial
                                                                  Bacterial Diversity
                                                                             Diversity among
                                                                                       among the
                                                                                               the Experimental    Groups
                                                                                                    Experimental Groups
                                     To
                                     To investigate
                                         investigate the
                                                      the statistically
                                                           statistically significant
                                                                         significant differences
                                                                                       differences inin microbial
                                                                                                         microbial diversity
                                                                                                                    diversity and
                                                                                                                                and abun-
                                                                                                                                      abun-
                               dance  at  the phylum    level  in  each group    (healthy,  polyps,    and  cancer)  we
                               dance at the phylum level in each group (healthy, polyps, and cancer) we used Statistical  used   Statistical
                               Analyses
                               Analyses of  ofMetagenomic
                                               MetagenomicProfiles
                                                                 Profiles(STAMP)
                                                                            (STAMP)  software
                                                                                        softwareusing
                                                                                                    usinga two-sided
                                                                                                            a two-sided White’s   non-par-
                                                                                                                            White’s     non-
                               ametric   t-test (p < 0.05) following    a Benjamini–Hochberg         analysis   to control
                               parametric t-test (p < 0.05) following a Benjamini–Hochberg analysis to control for false     for  false dis-
                               covery   rates.  The  STAMP     statistical  comparison     is shown     in Figure  3,  and
                               discovery rates. The STAMP statistical comparison is shown in Figure 3, and revealed that    revealed    that
                               only
                               only Synergistetes
                                     Synergistetes at at the
                                                         the phylum
                                                              phylum level
                                                                        level was
                                                                                was significantly
                                                                                     significantly enriched
                                                                                                      enriched in   the healthy
                                                                                                                 in the  healthy control
                                                                                                                                    control
                               and
                               and polyps groups. The abundance of this bacterium significantly decreased in the polyps
                                    polyps   groups.   The  abundance     of  this bacterium   significantly   decreased    in the  polyps
                               group
                               group asas compared
                                           compared to tohealthy
                                                           healthycontrols.
                                                                     controls.Similarly,
                                                                                 Similarly,only
                                                                                             only  this
                                                                                                 this    bacterium
                                                                                                       bacterium   waswas   also
                                                                                                                         also     found
                                                                                                                              found       to
                                                                                                                                       to be
                               be significantly    enriched  in  the polyps    and  cancer  groups.    The  abundance
                               significantly enriched in the polyps and cancer groups. The abundance was decreased in     was   decreased
                               thethe
                               in      polyps
                                    polyps       as compared
                                             as compared    to thetocancer
                                                                     the cancer
                                                                             group. group.   However,
                                                                                      However,    healthy    controlcontrol
                                                                                                           healthy                   cancer
                                                                                                                              and groups
                                                                                                                      and cancer
                               groups
                               did  not did
                                         shownotany
                                                  show any    significant
                                                     significant            enrichment.
                                                                   enrichment.




                               Figure 3.
                               Figure     The post
                                       3. The  post hoc
                                                     hoc plot
                                                         plot of of enriched
                                                                    enriched bacterial
                                                                                bacterial phyla
                                                                                           phyla among
                                                                                                   among three
                                                                                                          three health
                                                                                                                 health conditions
                                                                                                                          conditions (healthy,
                                                                                                                                       (healthy,
                                        and cancer).
                               polyps, and   cancer).The
                                                      Theleft
                                                           leftside
                                                                 sideofof
                                                                        these figures
                                                                          these        shows
                                                                                 figures   shows   abundance
                                                                                               the the         ratio of
                                                                                                       abundance        differentially
                                                                                                                    ratio of           enriched
                                                                                                                             differentially en-
                               riched bacterial
                               bacterial        phyla.
                                         phyla. The     Theside
                                                     right    right side   represents
                                                                   represents   the      the significant
                                                                                    significant          difference
                                                                                                 difference at       at p <
                                                                                                               p < 0.05,  whereas  whereas
                                                                                                                             0.05, the      the
                                                                                                                                        middle
                               middle
                               one     one the
                                           indicates
                                   indicates     mean the mean     proportion of
                                                        proportion of               differentially
                                                                          differentially   enrichedenriched  bacterialin the
                                                                                                     bacterial phyla           in the 95%
                                                                                                                        phyla95%           con-
                                                                                                                                   confidence.
                               fidence.
                                      To further investigate changes in bacterial diversity and abundance at the genus
                               levelTo in further  investigate
                                           healthy, polyps,      changes
                                                               and   canceringroups,
                                                                                bacterialthediversity  and analysis
                                                                                              comparison     abundance at      the a
                                                                                                                          revealed genus   level
                                                                                                                                        total of
                               in healthy,were
                               12 genera       polyps, and   cancerenriched
                                                    significantly     groups, in thethe cancer
                                                                                      comparison andanalysis
                                                                                                      healthyrevealed
                                                                                                                  groups, a total
                                                                                                                            includingof 12  gen-
                                                                                                                                         Rothia,
                               era were
                               Limnobacter, significantly
                                                 WAL_1855D,enriched in     the cancer and
                                                                 Coriobacterium,              healthy groups,
                                                                                       Succinatimonas,             including Rothia,
                                                                                                           Methabobrevibacter,           Limno-
                                                                                                                                     Osllospira,
                               bacter,   WAL_1855D,
                               Abiotrophila,              Coriobacterium,
                                                 Acinebacter,                   Succinatimonas,
                                                               Coxiella, Haloferula,                Methabobrevibacter,
                                                                                           and Leuconostoc      (Figure 4). Osllospira,
                                                                                                                                Among these Abi-
                               otrophila,   Acinebacter,
                               significant genera,        Coxiella,
                                                        except  for Haloferula,
                                                                     Oscillosprirand      Leuconostoc
                                                                                      which   was highly(Figure
                                                                                                             enriched Among
                                                                                                                   4). in               signifi-
                                                                                                                                 thesecontrols,
                                                                                                                            healthy
                               all
                               cantthe  other 11
                                      genera,      significant
                                                except          genera were
                                                        for Oscillosprira         highly
                                                                              which        enriched in
                                                                                      was highly          the in
                                                                                                    enriched   cancer   group. As
                                                                                                                    healthy          shown
                                                                                                                              controls,       in
                                                                                                                                         all the
                               Figure114 left, a
                               other              comparison
                                           significant  generaof    the highly
                                                                 were    polyps and     cancer
                                                                                  enriched      group
                                                                                              in the    showed
                                                                                                     cancer        a total
                                                                                                               group.   Asof 18   significantly
                                                                                                                             shown in    Figure
                               enriched
                               4 left,  a genera.
                                           comparisonAmong    them
                                                          of the      Aeromonas,
                                                                   polyps            WAL_1855D,
                                                                              and cancer             Oscillospira,
                                                                                             group showed                 Mitsuokella
                                                                                                                     and of 18
                                                                                                                 a total                were in
                                                                                                                                  significantly
                               enriched genera. Among them Aeromonas, WAL_1855D, Oscillospira, and Mitsuokella were
                               significantly    higher  abundance      in the  polyps    group,  whereas    the  remaining     14 genera
                               in significantly
                                  significantly higher
                                                    higherabundance
                                                            abundanceininthe   thecancer
                                                                                    polyps group.
                                                                                             group,A comparison
                                                                                                      whereas theofremaining
                                                                                                                         the healthy 14controls
                                                                                                                                         genera
                               and   polyp group
                               were in                showed
                                          significantly   highersixabundance
                                                                     significantly    abundant
                                                                                   in the  cancergenera.
                                                                                                   group. A  Among              Anaerotruncus
                                                                                                                       them, of the
                                                                                                                comparison              healthy
                               and    Mitsuokella
                               controls    and polyp were  in showed
                                                        group significantly six higher    abundance
                                                                                significantly   abundantin the   polyps
                                                                                                             genera.       group.
                                                                                                                       Among         However,
                                                                                                                                 them,   Anaer-
                               the   abundance
                               otruncus     and of     the other
                                                  Mitsuokella   werefourin significant
                                                                            significantly genera
                                                                                             higherincluding     Cytophaga,
                                                                                                      abundance in              Campylobacter,
                                                                                                                          the polyps     group.
                               Enterococcus
                               However,         and
                                              the    Pseudomonas
                                                  abundance          showed
                                                                of the    otherafour
                                                                                   decrease   in abundance
                                                                                        significant             in the polyps
                                                                                                     genera including            as compared
                                                                                                                             Cytophaga,    Cam-
                               to  the  healthy   control  group.   As   shown    in Figure   4, based   on
                               pylobacter, Enterococcus and Pseudomonas showed a decrease in abundance in thetumor    presence    andpolyps
                                                                                                                                       absence,
                                                                                                                                              as
                               the abundance
                               compared                Olsenella
                                              to theofhealthy     and Lactobacillus
                                                               control    group. As shownat the genus    level
                                                                                                 in Figure    4,was
                                                                                                                 basedsignificantly   reduced
                                                                                                                         on tumor presence
                               in the patient group as compared to healthy controls. However, LEfSe analysis showed
                               no significant difference in the microbial abundance among the experimental groups
                               (Supplementary Figure S2).
 Microorganisms 2021, 9, x                                                                                                                      9 of 20




                                      and absence, the abundance of Olsenella and Lactobacillus at the genus level was signifi-
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548          cantly reduced in the patient group as compared to healthy controls. However, 9 ofLEfSe
                                                                                                                           20
                                      analysis showed no significant difference in the microbial abundance among the experi-
                                      mental groups (Supplementary Figure S2).




       Figure4.4.The
      Figure        Thepost
                         posthochocplots
                                    plotsofofenriched
                                              enrichedbacterial
                                                        bacterialgenera
                                                                  generaamong
                                                                          amongthree
                                                                                   threehealth
                                                                                         healthconditions
                                                                                                conditions(healthy,
                                                                                                            (healthy,polyps,
                                                                                                                       polyps,and
                                                                                                                               andcancer).
                                                                                                                                    cancer).The
                                                                                                                                              The
       leftside
      left   sideofofthese
                       thesefigures
                              figures shows
                                    shows    thethe abundance
                                                 abundance      ratio
                                                             ratio of of differentially
                                                                      differentially    enriched
                                                                                     enriched     bacterial
                                                                                               bacterial genera. The The
                                                                                                             genera.        side side
                                                                                                                      rightright      represents
                                                                                                                                 represents  the
       the significant
      significant          difference
                    difference   at p < at  p <whereas
                                        0.05,    0.05, whereas  the middle
                                                        the middle           one indicates
                                                                     one indicates  the meanthe  mean proportion
                                                                                               proportion            of differentially
                                                                                                           of differentially            enriched
                                                                                                                             enriched bacterial
       bacterial genera in the 95% confidence interval.
      genera in the 95% confidence interval.

                                      3.5. 16S rRNA-Based Community-Level Functional Prediction of Health Conditions
                                     3.5. 16S rRNA-Based Community-Level Functional Prediction of Health Conditions
                                            To investigate the microbial functional prediction in health conditions, PICRUSt2
                                           To investigate the microbial functional prediction in health conditions, PICRUSt2
                                      was implied based on 16S rRNA amplicon sequence data. A total of 154 KEGG level 3
                                     was implied based on 16S rRNA amplicon sequence data. A total of 154 KEGG level 3
                                      functions were identified which generated a total of 32 functions at KEGG level 2. For
                                     functions were identified which generated a total of 32 functions at KEGG level 2. For clear
                                      clear visualization and interpretation at KEGG level22, functions were further analyzed
                                     visualization and interpretation at KEGG level22, functions were further analyzed for
                                      for significant enrichment analysis among the three groups (healthy, polyps, and cancer)
                                     significant enrichment analysis among the three groups (healthy, polyps, and cancer) using
                                      using White’s nonparametric t-test, and multiple correlations among these significant
                                     White’s nonparametric t-test, and multiple correlations among these significant pathways
                                      pathways
                                     were         were performed
                                            performed                 by Benjamini–Hochberg
                                                         by Benjamini–Hochberg       FDR analysisFDR inanalysis
                                                                                                        STAMP.inAs   STAMP.
                                                                                                                        shown As    shown5,
                                                                                                                                 in Figure  in
                                      Figure  5, a total of 15 pathways    were significantly   enriched   in abundance
                                     a total of 15 pathways were significantly enriched in abundance among healthy, polyps, among    healthy,
                                      polyps,
                                     and       and
                                          cancer      cancerAmong
                                                   groups.    groups.   Among
                                                                     these,      these, andwith
                                                                            and associated     associated   withand
                                                                                                   the polyps            polyps
                                                                                                                   thecancer      and cancer
                                                                                                                              groups,   were
                                      groups,  were    increases in  the abundance    of  these pathways:     metabolism
                                     increases in the abundance of these pathways: metabolism of other amino acids, glycan   of other   amino
                                      acids, glycanand
                                     biosynthesis     biosynthesis
                                                          metabolism,andbiosynthesis
                                                                          metabolism, ofbiosynthesis   of othermetabolisms,
                                                                                            other secondary       secondary metabolisms,
                                                                                                                                  xenobiotic
                                     biodegradation and metabolism. Additionally, two pathways related torelated
                                      xenobiotic   biodegradation    and  metabolism.   Additionally,   two   pathways      cancer,tonamely
                                                                                                                                       cancer,
                                      namely   cancer:   overview   and  cancer:  specific  types, were   increased    in the
                                     cancer: overview and cancer: specific types, were increased in the cancer group compared  cancer   group
                                      compared     to healthy  subjects. Similarly, these   pathways   were   also  increased   significantly
                                     to healthy subjects. Similarly, these pathways were also increased significantly in the polyps
                                      in the polyps
                                     compared    to thecompared    to the
                                                        heathy group.       heathyonly
                                                                        However,    group.    However, only
                                                                                         the metabolism          the amino
                                                                                                           of other   metabolism     of other
                                                                                                                             acids pathway
                                      amino acids
                                     was             pathway
                                          significantly         wasinsignificantly
                                                         enriched                  enriched
                                                                       abundance in the       in as
                                                                                           polypsabundance
                                                                                                      compared in the  polyps
                                                                                                                   to the       as group.
                                                                                                                           cancer  compared
                                      to the cancer group.
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                                                      10 of 20
 Microorganisms 2021, 9, x                                                                                                                          10 of 20




        Figure5.5.The
      Figure       Thepost
                        posthochocplotplotofofenriched
                                                enrichedmicrobial
                                                         microbialpredicted      functionsamong
                                                                      predictedfunctions    amongthree
                                                                                                     threehealth
                                                                                                           healthconditions
                                                                                                                  conditions(healthy,
                                                                                                                             (healthy,polyps,
                                                                                                                                        polyps,andand
        cancer).The
      cancer).    Theleft
                       leftside
                             sideofofthese
                                       thesefigures
                                               figureshows
                                                       showsthe theabundance    ratiofofdifferentially
                                                                     abundanceratio      differentiallyenriched
                                                                                                         enrichedKEGG
                                                                                                                   KEGG pathways.
                                                                                                                         pathways.The Theright
                                                                                                                                           rightside
                                                                                                                                                  side
      represents
        representsthethesignificant       differenceatatp p< <0.05,
                          significantdifference                 0.05,whereas
                                                                      whereasthe
                                                                               themiddle
                                                                                   middleone oneindicates
                                                                                                  indicatesthe
                                                                                                             themean
                                                                                                                 meanproportion
                                                                                                                       proportionofofdifferentially
                                                                                                                                       differentially
        enrichedKEGG
      enriched     KEGGpathways
                             pathways    inin
                                            thethe  95%
                                                  95%   confidence.
                                                      confidence.

                                       3.6.16S
                                      3.6.  16SrRNA-Based
                                                rRNA-BasedCommunity-Level
                                                           Community-LevelFunctional
                                                                           FunctionalProfile
                                                                                      Profileand
                                                                                              andItsItsCorrelation
                                                                                                        Correlationbetween
                                                                                                                     between
                                       ExperimentalGroups
                                      Experimental  Groups
                                            AASpearman
                                                  Spearmancorrelation
                                                                  correlationanalysis
                                                                                analysiswas wasperformed
                                                                                                  performedtotofurther
                                                                                                                     furtherexplore
                                                                                                                               explorethe thecorrelation
                                                                                                                                                correlation
                                      between
                                        betweenthe   themicrobial
                                                          microbialcommunity
                                                                       communityatathe    thegenus
                                                                                              genuslevel
                                                                                                      leveland
                                                                                                             andthe thepredicted
                                                                                                                         predictedfunctions
                                                                                                                                     functionsatatKEGG
                                                                                                                                                     KEGG
                                      level
                                        level2,2,asasshown
                                                       shownininSupplementary
                                                                    SupplementaryTable  TableS1.S1.The
                                                                                                    Thestatistical
                                                                                                         statisticalsignificances
                                                                                                                       significanceswerewereconsidered
                                                                                                                                               considered
                                      highly
                                        highlypositive
                                                  positiveand and negative
                                                                     negative atat p < 0.05
                                                                                         0.05 and
                                                                                               and<0.01,
                                                                                                     <0.01,respectively.
                                                                                                              respectively.For   For  better
                                                                                                                                    better     visualiza-
                                                                                                                                            visualization,
                                      tion,
                                        we weonlyonly      considered
                                                      considered          statistically
                                                                      statistically       significant
                                                                                      significant       genera-associated
                                                                                                    genera-associated             predicted
                                                                                                                              predicted        functions.
                                                                                                                                           functions.    As
                                      As  shownininFigure
                                        shown            Figure6,6,the
                                                                     thecorrelation
                                                                         correlation analysis
                                                                                        analysis revealed that all   all genera
                                                                                                                         generashowed
                                                                                                                                   showedaasignificant
                                                                                                                                                significant
                                      correlation
                                        correlationwith  withatatleast
                                                                   leastone
                                                                         onepredicted
                                                                              predictedfunction.
                                                                                            function.Among
                                                                                                        Amongthe    thepositively
                                                                                                                         positivelycorrelated
                                                                                                                                      correlatedgenera,
                                                                                                                                                    genera,
                                      Dorea
                                        Doreashowed
                                                 showeda astrongly
                                                               stronglypositive
                                                                           positivecorrelation
                                                                                       correlation(p(p< <0.01,
                                                                                                           0.01,0.05)
                                                                                                                   0.05)with
                                                                                                                          with87.7%
                                                                                                                                 87.7%(n(n= =12/14)
                                                                                                                                                12/14)pre-
                                                                                                                                                        pre-
                                      dicted    functions.     This   was   followed     by  Ruminococcus      (p  <  0.01, 0.05)   78.6%
                                        dicted functions. This was followed by Ruminococcus (p < 0.01, 0.05) 78.6% (n = 11/14), Clos-       (n  =  11/14),
                                      Clostridium
                                        tridium (p <(p0.01,
                                                          < 0.01,
                                                               0.05)0.05) 78.6%
                                                                      78.6%   (n =(n11/14),
                                                                                      = 11/14),    Bacteroides
                                                                                             Bacteroides   (p < 0.01,   0.05)0.05)
                                                                                                                 (p < 0.01,   71.4% 71.4%   (n = 10/14),
                                                                                                                                       (n = 10/14),   Egger-
                                      Eggerthella     (p < 0.01,  0.05) 71.4%   (n = 10/14),    Streptococcus   (p <  0.5) 50%   (n
                                        thella (p < 0.01, 0.05) 71.4% (n = 10/14), Streptococcus (p < 0.5) 50% (n = 7/14), Atopobium= 7/14),  Atopobium (p <
                                      (p <
                                        0.5)0.5)
                                             43.9%43.9%(n =(n =  6/14),
                                                             6/14),      Pseudomonas
                                                                     Pseudomonas     (p < (p < 0.5)
                                                                                           0.5) 14.3%  (n = (n
                                                                                                     14.3%   2/14),   and and
                                                                                                                 = 2/14),         Actinomyces
                                                                                                                           Actinomyces           0.5)< 0.5)
                                                                                                                                           (p < (p    14.3%
                                      14.3%    (n = 2/14),
                                        (n = 2/14),            respectively.
                                                        respectively.    Other Other      positively
                                                                                 positively            correlated
                                                                                               correlated    generagenera
                                                                                                                       showedshowed        a significant
                                                                                                                                   a significant    associa-
                                      association       with  one   respective    predicted     function.   Additionally,
                                        tion with one respective predicted function. Additionally, five genera including       five  genera    including
                                                                                                                                                      Desul-
                                      Desulfovibrio,      Odoribacter,
                                        fovibrio, Odoribacter,           Prevotella,
                                                                     Prevotella,       Scuccinatimonas,
                                                                                 Scuccinatimonas,      andand      Elizabethkingia,
                                                                                                             Elizabethkingia,          showed
                                                                                                                                  showed          a 71.4%
                                                                                                                                             a 71.4%    (n =
                                          = 10/14),
                                      (n10/14),   43.9%  43.9%    (n = 6/14),
                                                            (n = 6/14),  14.3%14.3%      (n = 14.3%
                                                                                 (n = 2/14),    2/14), (n
                                                                                                        14.3%     (n =and
                                                                                                           = 2/14),         7.1%and
                                                                                                                         2/14),                   = 1/14)
                                                                                                                                         1/14)(nnegatively
                                                                                                                                   (n =7.1%
                                      negatively
                                        significantsignificant
                                                        correlation  correlation   with predicted
                                                                       with predicted      functions,functions,
                                                                                                        respectively.respectively.
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                                            11 of 20
Microorganisms 2021, 9, x                                                                                                               11 of 20




      Figure
      Figure 6.6. Correlations
                  Correlations between
                                between the
                                          the bacterial
                                              bacterial experimental
                                                        experimental groups
                                                                      groups community
                                                                              community and
                                                                                         and predicted
                                                                                              predicted functional
                                                                                                          functional profiles,
                                                                                                                       profiles, based
                                                                                                                                 based on
                                                                                                                                        on
      16S  rRNA    amplicon   sequencing.   Spearman    correlation analysis heatmap constructed   for each  pairwise    comparison
      16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. Spearman correlation analysis heatmap constructed for each pairwise comparison between             be-
      level 2 level
      tween    Kyoto2 Encyclopedia
                      Kyoto Encyclopedia
                                      of Genes   Genes
                                              of and     and Genomes
                                                     Genomes    (KEGG)(KEGG)
                                                                        pathwayspathways  and bacterial
                                                                                   and bacterial taxa at the    at thelevel.
                                                                                                          taxagenus     genus  level.
                                                                                                                             The      The
                                                                                                                                  positive
      positive and negative correlations are indicated in red and blue colors, respectively. The correlation was considered sig-
      and negative correlations are indicated in red and blue colors, respectively. The correlation was considered significant at
      nificant at ** p < 0.01 and * p < 0.05.
      ** p < 0.01 and * p < 0.05.
                                   4. Discussion
                                    4. Discussion
                                         Accumulating evidences have highlighted that the breakdown of gut microbiota is
                                   linkedAccumulating
                                            to a variety of evidences
                                                              disorders,  have
                                                                            suchhighlighted     that thebowel
                                                                                   as inflammatory        breakdown      of diabetes,
                                                                                                                  disease,  gut microbiota    is
                                                                                                                                       obesity,
                                    linked   to a variety  of  disorders,    such  as  inflammatory      bowel    disease,  diabetes,
                                   and various types of cancer, particularly colorectal cancer [14,44]. In this study, we found         obesity,
                                    and
                                   as    various types
                                       compared           of cancer,
                                                    to healthy         particularly
                                                                  controls,   a highercolorectal
                                                                                          numbercancer
                                                                                                    of ASVs[14,44].  In this study,
                                                                                                                associated   with the    found
                                                                                                                                     wecancer
                                    as compared to healthy controls, a higher number of ASVs associated with the cancer
                                   group followed by the polyps group, which is in accordance with a previous report [17].
                                    group followed by the polyps group, which is in accordance with a previous report [17].
                                   Many studies indicated that the ASV approach is of much higher resolution than the OUT
                                    Many studies indicated that the ASV approach is of much higher resolution than the OUT
                                   approach, especially in the human microbiota [41]. Additionally, the alpha diversity indi-
                                    approach, especially in the human microbiota [41]. Additionally, the alpha diversity indices
                                   ces revealed similar patterns of diversity distribution among the three experimental
                                    revealed similar patterns of diversity distribution among the three experimental groups,
                                   groups, suggesting that the diversity of gut microbes increase following CRC develop-
                                    suggesting that the diversity of gut microbes increase following CRC development and
                                   ment and progression. However, differences in diversity have been reported in previous
                                    progression. However, differences in diversity have been reported in previous studies,
                                   studies, which are mainly associated with the nature of sampling or stages of CRC. The
                                    which are mainly associated with the nature of sampling or stages of CRC. The elevation
                                   elevation of certain phylum in this study, such as Euryarchaeota, Fusobacteria, Len-
                                    of certain phylum in this study, such as Euryarchaeota, Fusobacteria, Lentisphaerae, and
                                   tisphaerae, and Proteobacteria, were higher in abundance in cancer patients or remained
                                    Proteobacteria, were higher in abundance in cancer patients or remained the same in polyps
                                   the same in polyps patients as compared to healthy controls, which is consistent with pre-
                                    patients as compared to healthy controls, which is consistent with previous studies [45,46].
                                   vious
                                    Severalstudies
                                              studies[45,46]. Several studies
                                                      have highlighted            have
                                                                           the role       highlighted
                                                                                     of these phylum in  thetherole of theseproinflammation,
                                                                                                                 dysbiosis,    phylum in the
                                   dysbiosis,    proinflammation,      and   progression    of  CRC   [24,45].  Additionally,
                                    and progression of CRC [24,45]. Additionally, Fusobacteria is also considered                Fusobacteria
                                                                                                                                    one of the
                                   is
                                    biomarkers for the prognosis of CRC, because it is consistently associatedit with
                                      also  considered    one  of  the  biomarkers     for the   prognosis   of  CRC,  because      is consist-
                                                                                                                                          CRC-
                                   ently  associated   with  CRC-associated      microbiota     [47–49]. Immune      modulation
                                    associated microbiota [47–49]. Immune modulation is assumed to be the key mechanism            is assumed
                                   to
                                    bybe  the key
                                        which        mechanism by
                                                 Fusobacterium          which
                                                                     plays      Fusobacterium
                                                                            a role                  plays a role these
                                                                                     in CRC carcinogenesis,         in CRC    carcinogenesis,
                                                                                                                           include   increased
                                   these   include   increased    natural   killer  cell  inhibitors   and   myeloid-derived
                                    natural killer cell inhibitors and myeloid-derived suppressor, Fap2 and FadA                  suppressor,
                                                                                                                                      virulence
                                   Fap2   andmicroRNAs
                                    factors,    FadA virulence      factors, microRNAs
                                                             and bacterial     metabolismand       bacterial
                                                                                               [50,51].  Among metabolism     [50,51].
                                                                                                                    the top three       Among
                                                                                                                                     dominant
                                   the
                                    bacteria in abundance at the genus level, Bacteroides was the most dominant in the most
                                        top  three  dominant    bacteria   in abundance     at  the genus   level,  Bacteroides was   the three
                                   dominant
                                    experimentalin the three whereas
                                                    groups,   experimental     groups,
                                                                         the second       whereas
                                                                                      and third      the second
                                                                                                   most prevalent  and
                                                                                                                     genera    mostdifferent
                                                                                                                       thirdwere     prevalent
                                                                                                                                             in
                                   genera
                                    the     were
                                        cancer     different inand
                                                 (Clostridium,    the cancer   (Clostridium,
                                                                      Butyricimonas),    polypsand    Butyricimonas),
                                                                                                  (Clostridium,         polyps and
                                                                                                                  and Prevotella)(Clostridium,
                                                                                                                                        healthy
                                   and Prevotella) and healthy control (Alistipes, and Roseburia) groups. Additionally, in pre-
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                            12 of 20




                               control (Alistipes, and Roseburia) groups. Additionally, in previous reports, a difference
                               in the predominant bacteria at the genus level has been observed, conferred by various
                               factors such as diet, age, alcohol, geographical location and analytical methods [52–54].
                               Bacteroides are predominantly found in the human gut as one of the major microbiota
                               and were previously reported to be associated with healthy subjects, polyps, and cancer
                               patients as a dominant bacterium [55]. In previous reports the genus Prevotella has been
                               repeatedly associated with diets rich in fiber, whereas Bacteroides are associated with diets
                               rich in fat and animal protein [56–58]. Moreover, Prevotella has also been associated with
                               inflammatory responses in chronic disease [59]. Therefore, further research is needed to
                               know the potential role of this bacterium in inflammatory responses associated with CRC.
                               Additionally, 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing revealed 15 genera were only associated with
                               the cancer experimental group, which included Methanobrevibacter, Coxiella, Actinomyces,
                               Coriobacterium, Paraeggerthella, Slackia, Porphyromonas, Vestibaculum, Abiotrophia, Leuconostoc,
                               weissella, Peptostreptococcus, Bulleidia, Cloacibacillus, Haloferula, indicating these microbes
                               might have a special role in CRC initiation and development. However, the role of the
                               majority of these bacteria in CRC is still scarce. Nowadays, discussion on an increase or shift
                               of the archaeal population and methanogenic bacteria is becoming a hot topic associated
                               with CRC [60,61]. A previous study also indicated a significantly higher abundance of
                               Methanobrevibacter in fecal samples was associated with the tumor group as compared
                               to the control group [17]. Recently, the density of the genus Methanobrevibacter has been
                               negatively correlated with butyrate concentrations which have been reported to be involved
                               in supplementing energy to epithelial cells and altering mutagenic or toxic compounds [62].
                               This can support microbiota-related inflammatory events that occur in CRC pathogenesis,
                               due to the fact that methane-producing bacteria consume SCFA [61]. Previous studies have
                               suggested that the higher production of methane could lead to CRC [63–65].
                                     The possible reasons for the high unassigned reads of Figure 2 might be due to the
                               difference in the taxonomy of selected classifiers (including reference databases) under the
                               ASV approach. In previous studies, it has been documented that the Greengene database
                               has some limitations for 16S rRNA taxonomic profiling because this database is no longer
                               being maintained [66,67]. For example, in the case of unclassified Kingdom or unclassified
                               phylum taxonomy assignments, the taxonomy classifier was confident enough to assign
                               phylum taxonomy assignments, but not high enough to assign the species or genus or
                               species level, respectively. Regarding the taxonomy classifiers, it could be improved by
                               refinements to the taxonomy classifiers [68,69] and by updating reference databases, such as
                               SILVA or RDP [70–73]. The cross validation of bacterial taxonomy was performed using the
                               SILVA database (Figure S3), which revealed 181 genera and a reduced ratio of unassigned
                               reads compared to the Greengene database, indicating the low resolution associated with
                               the Greengene database might be due to the low amount of bacterial DNA sequencing data.
                               Recent studies have reported that compared to Greengene and RDP databases, the SILVA
                               database has the highest per-read accuracy and lowest error rates in 16S metagenomic
                               classification, regardless of the software used in classification [70,74]. However, Balvočiūtė
                               and Huson indicated that SILVA, RDP, and Greengenes map well into NCBI, and what
                               kind of database is best for the 16S amplicon survey is based on the research aim [70].
                               The advantage of Greengene is its species-level identification and high accuracy, but the
                               weakness is its lesser amount of microbial sequence data.
                                     Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes are the two most commonly dominant bacteria of the
                               human gut and their composition remains relatively unaffected in healthy subjects [75].
                               However, the ratio of F/B is considered to be potentially correlated with several diseases
                               that can be used as a preliminary basis for diagnosing certain diseases [76]. In this study,
                               the ratio of F/B was found to be higher in patients with colorectal cancer, followed by
                               polyps patients, than in healthy controls, which is in line with previous studies [77,78].
                                     Several studies have demonstrated the shift of the microbial community in CRC
                               patients and healthy controls at different taxa levels [17,79]. In this study there was only
                               one phylum, namely Synergestetes, which was significantly enriched in the healthy control
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                         13 of 20




                               and polyps groups, and a decrease in the mean proportion of this phyla was observed
                               in the polyps group. Similarly, it was found significantly enriched in abundance in the
                               cancer and polyps groups, and a decrease in abundance was associated with the polyps
                               as compared to the cancer group. Thus, the significant shift of this bacterium among the
                               experimental groups could be a possible biomarker for the early detection of polyps in CRC
                               patients. A previous study has demonstrated a similar trend where a decreased abundance
                               of Synergistetes at the phylum level was observed with the progress of CRC [80].
                                     At the genus level, Rothia, Limnobacter, WAL_1855D, Coriobacterium, Succinatimonas,
                               Methabobrevibacter, Abiotrophila, Actinobacteria, Coxiella, Haloferula, and Leuconostoc were
                               significantly predominant in the cancer group as compared to healthy controls. However,
                               the mean proportion of Oscillopsia was reduced in the cancer group when compared to
                               healthy controls. These results indicate that these highly enriched bacteria have a strong
                               relationship with cancer and may have a vital role in the development and progression of
                               CRC. In a previous report it is highlighted that a microbiota change indeed promotes the
                               occurrence and development of CRC [80]. The enrichment analysis showed Acinetobacter
                               was the most highly enriched genus in the cancer group. The next generation sequencing
                               of fecal and luminal microbiota of CRC patients and healthy subjects has revealed the
                               higher richness of Acinetobacter at a genus level to be associated with CRC [81]. Similarly
                               a recent study based on 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing has highlighted the envelopment
                               of the genus Acinetobacter in adenomas and diverticula [82]. The genus Weissella belong
                               to lactose fermenters, and certain species act as pathogens and occur mostly in patients
                               with impaired host defenses [83]. Additionally, the genus Rothia has also been described
                               as a human pathogen [84]. The enrichment of pathogenic bacteria associated with cancer,
                               suggest that they might be involved in the disruption of the intestinal environment by
                               causing pH changes, as previously described in the case of Helicobacter [81].
                                     Additionally, the enrichment comparison of the cancer with the polyps groups re-
                               vealed 18 significant enriched genera, of which 14 were highly enriched in abundance in
                               cancer, whereas only four genera were highly abundant in the polyps group (Figure 4).
                               These findings suggest that a higher shift of bacteria at the genus level represent their
                               positive role in the development and progression of CRC. In enrichment analysis, the
                               most abundant genus associated with cancer was identified as Pyramidobacter, followed
                               by Peptostreptococcus, whereas Aeromonas was found as the predominant genus associated
                               with polyps. In a previous study on oral microbiota, the role of Peptostreptococcus has been
                               described as a biofilm producer which protects the cancerous cells from host immunity [85].
                               Therefore, the presence of this genus suggests the involvement of Peptostreptococcus in CRC
                               progression. Peptosteptococcus has been identified to be involved in the proliferation of
                               CRC by inducing the biosynthesis of intracellular cholesterol [86]. Pyramidobacter being
                               a sulfidogenic bacteria associated with diets higher in protein intake, can produce H2 S,
                               which is one of the key factors leading to the impairment of mucus barriers at tumor sites,
                               facilitating tumor-elicited inflammation [87].
                                     The enrichment analysis at the genus level also showed a significant association of six
                               genera in the polyps and healthy control groups. Among these Cytophaga, Campylobacter,
                               Pseudomonas, and Enterococcus were highly enriched in abundance and associated with
                               healthy controls, whereas Anaerotruncus and Mitsoukolia were significantly in abundance
                               and associated with the polyps group. A lower abundance of these bacteria in the polyps
                               as compared to healthy control group suggest the dysbiosis of gut microbiota, as Entero-
                               coccus and other facultative anaerobes or aerotolerant bacteria are vital for the microbial
                               homeostasis in the large intestine [81]. Similarly, a previous study indicated the higher
                               enrichment of Enterococcus and Anaerotruncus along with other bacteria in CRC [88].
                                     Additionally, in this study, only two genera, including Olsenella and Lactobacillus,
                               were found significantly enriched in healthy control and patient groups, based on tumor
                               presence and absence. The abundance of these genera significantly declined in the patient
                               group compared to the healthy control group, which shows that they could be considered
                               a biomarker in the early detection of CRC, and a risk factor of CRC. However, further
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                           14 of 20




                               research is needed to explore these genera up to the species level to make potential biomark-
                               ers related with CRC. Both Lactobacillus and Olsenella are the inhabitants of the human
                               gut and have been previously found in association with reduced gut inflammation [17,89].
                               Additionally, Lactobacillus has been suggested as one of the probiotics to inhibit the devel-
                               opment and progression of gut epithelial cells [17]. However, little is known about the
                               role of the Olsenella species, including its disappearance during CRC which needs to be
                               further studied.
                                     However, using LEfSe analysis we revealed no significant differences in microbial
                               abundance among the experimental groups. It is a big challenge to identify the differences
                               of two or more phenotypes in any metagenomic dataset [90]. In order to find statistical
                               significance, biological consistency, and the effect size estimation of predicted biomarkers,
                               many approaches or analyses from simple to complex have been established [91]. Re-
                               garding simple approaches or analyses, the t-test or ANOVA and non-parametric tests,
                               such as the Wilcoxon test, White’s t-test, Kruskal–Wallace test, and Welch’s t-test, are
                               often used to find statistically significant differences between two groups, which also have
                               the option of adjusting p-values using the Benjamini–Hochberg method [91]. Regarding
                               advanced analysis, there is much software constructed to summarize statistical significance,
                               biological consistency, and the effect size estimation of predicted biomarkers, including
                               Metastats/metagenomeSeq, LEFSe, STAMP, etc. [90–92]. However, the results of these
                               statistical analysis approaches are all credible, and the most suitable analysis results can be
                               selected according to the associated research background.
                                     Previous studies have shown that various gut microbes and their associated metabo-
                               lites exhibit proinflammatory and procarcinogenic properties which ultimately exert a great
                               impact on colorectal carcinogenesis [13–15]. Recently it has been highlighted that dietary
                               fat, microbially induced lipids and obesity, may lead to major factors that contribute to
                               the increased rate of early-onset CRC [93]. Dysregulation of lipid metabolism in cancer
                               cells, which is increasingly recognized as one of the characteristics of aggressive cancer,
                               correlates with a poorer prognosis and shorter disease-free survival in CRC [93,94]. In this
                               study, the relative abundance of lipid metabolism increased significantly in both the polyps
                               and cancer groups compared to healthy subjects. Similarly, a previous study, based on
                               metabolomics analysis using H NMR spectroscopy, highlighted a significant increase in
                               the level of lipids in the malignant tissues of colon mucosa [30]. Additionally, the KEGG
                               pathway biosynthesis of other secondary metabolites was found to be the second most
                               abundant metabolic pathway. The biosynthesis of other secondary metabolites helps in
                               maintaining the homeostasis of gut microbiota. However, a compromised gut microbiota
                               leads to increased concentrations and the biosynthesis of other secondary metabolites
                               contributing to epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and thus favors the metastatic niche’s
                               setup [95]. Similarly, it has also been reported that xenobiotic metabolism and degrada-
                               tion increase the susceptibility of colonocytes to protumorigenic bacterial metabolites [96].
                               In the present study, xenobiotic metabolism and degradation was the third most abun-
                               dant metabolic pathway associated with polyps and cancer groups. Glycosylation is a
                               key post-translational process associated with proteins that alters protein functions and
                               plays a vital role in various biological processes. It has been observed that the aberrant
                               process of glycosylation is linked with the occurrence and progression of different types
                               of cancer, including CRC [97]. A higher abundance of this pathway was significantly
                               associated with polyps and cancer groups than with healthy subjects, suggesting that
                               this is particularly important in the pathology of microbiota-associated diseases such as
                               CRC. Similarly, previously in gut microbiota-associated diseases, such as inflammatory
                               bowel disease, various microbe species have been linked with the metabolism of mucus
                               glycans [98]. The proliferation of cancer cells also needs an abundant supply of amino
                               acids that act as substrates for protein synthesis and are essential in energy generation
                               and the maintenance of cellular redox hemostasis. The nutrient-poor microenvironment of
                               cancer and stromal cells requires a relationship with the microbial community to fulfill their
                               essential nutrients [99]. This study found a higher abundance of amino acid metabolism
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                             15 of 20




                               associated with polyps and cancer groups. Additionally, two cancer-related KEGG path-
                               ways, such as cancer overview and specific types of cancer, were in higher abundance in
                               polyps and cancer groups compared with healthy subjects. At KEGG level 3, these two
                               pathways belonged to choline metabolism in cancer, colorectal cancer, and MicroRNAs in
                               cancer (KEGG level 3 not shown here). In previous studies, it has been highlighted that
                               an increased abundance of choline is responsible for the signal transduction or growth
                               promotion of various human malignancies, including colon cancer and adenoma [100,101].
                               Similarly, a previous study, based on metabolomics analysis using H NMR spectroscopy,
                               highlighted a significant increase in the level of choline in the malignant tissues of colon
                               mucosa [30]. Additionally, MicroRNA is a short endogenous RNA molecule that regulates
                               post-transcriptional gene expression and is considered a key factor for the mutagenesis
                               of CRC, leading to a potential biomarker for the diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy of
                               CRC [102]. This study’s overall functional prediction associated with gut microbiota, sug-
                               gests that the metabolic reprogramming and these microbes’ metabolic products may serve
                               as potential biomarkers for the increased risk of CRC development and progression in
                               humans. However, further confirmation of the presence of these microbial metabolites
                               needs proteomic based analysis.
                                     A Spearman correlation analysis was performed to examine the correlation between
                               the predicted functions and microbial community of the three experimental groups. The
                               analysis revealed that Dorea, Ruminococcus, Clostridium, Bacteroides, Eggerthella, Streptococcus,
                               and Atopobium were strongly positive in their correlation with the majority of the predicted
                               functions, indicating these microbes can independently play an important role in the
                               initiation and progression of CRP. Several studies have highlighted that the metabolic
                               contribution of these microbes is associated with the development of CRC. For example,
                               the genus Dorea has the capability to adhere to cancerous cells and may confer this genus
                               a competitive benefit in the cancerous colorectal environment [103]. The increased level
                               of Ruminococcus metabolites associated with lipid and amino acid metabolism have been
                               detected from the stool samples of CRC patients [104]. The role of these significantly
                               positive bacteria in xenobiotic biodegradation and metabolism by their enzymes, have
                               also been highlighted in previous studies [105]. Additionally, Desulfovibrio showed a
                               significantly negative correlation with the majority of predicted functions, followed by
                               Odoribacter, Prevotella, Scuccinatimonas, and Elizabethkingia, suggesting these bacteria are
                               involved in the regulation of their respective predicted functions.
                                     The overall taxonomic findings suggest that the significant shift of microbial diversity
                               increases with the progress of CRC. For a more clear understanding we can say that
                               the shift of microbes was less in polyps patients and higher in cancer patients when
                               comparing them with the healthy controls. The shift in microbial taxa at different taxonomic
                               levels could be a possible biomarker in the diagnosis and treatment of CRC and needs
                               further extensive validation. However, the role of gut microbiota and their community
                               structure in different precursors of CRC have not been clearly discussed in previous studies.
                               Additionally, the functional predictions associated with gut microbiota suggest that the
                               metabolic reprogramming of their metabolic products may serve as potential biomarkers
                               for the increased risk of CRC development and progression at different stages in humans.
                               However, for further confirmation of the presence of these microbial metabolites we
                               suggest that the use of metabolomic and proteomic based analyses might be considered
                               ideal methods.

                               Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/
                               10.3390/microorganisms9081548/s1, Figure S1: Ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroides in experimental
                               groups, Figure S2: Cladogram plot of LEfSe analysis among the experimental groups, Figure S3: 16S
                               rRNA amplicon sequencing based relative abundance of microbial diversity at genus level among
                               the experimental groups using SILVA database. Table S1: Correlation analysis between the predicted
                               functions and bacterial taxa at the genus level.
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                                           16 of 20




                                   Author Contributions: Conceptualization, B.-M.H.; methodology, C.-Y.F., B.H. and K.-H.L.; formal
                                   analysis and investigation, C.-Y.F., B.H. and J.-S.C.; writing—original draft preparation, C.-Y.F. and
                                   B.H.; writing—review and editing, J.-S.C. and B.-M.H.; funding acquisition, C.-Y.F. and B.-M.H.;
                                   resources, J.-S.C. and J.R.; supervision, J.-S.C., J.R. and B.-M.H. All authors have read and agreed to
                                   the published version of the manuscript.
                                   Funding: This research was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), Taiwan
                                   (108-2116-M-194-005 & 108-2811-M-194-507), the Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chia—Yi Christian
                                   Hospital (RCN007), and the Center for Innovative Research on Aging Society (CIRAS) from The
                                   Featured Areas Research Center Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout
                                   Project by the Ministry of Education (MOE), Taiwan.
                                   Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of
                                   the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Ditmanson Chia—
                                   Yi Christian Hospital, Taiwan (CYCH-IRB No. 2019021 and date of approval: 11 April 2019).
                                   Informed Consent Statement: Written informed consent has been obtained from the patient(s) to
                                   publish this paper.
                                   Data Availability Statement: The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current
                                   study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

                                   Abbreviations
                                   The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
                                   CRC      colorectal cancer
                                   ASV      amplicon sequence variant
                                   PCoA principal coordinates analysis


References
1.    Xiao, Q.; Lu, W.; Kong, X.; Shao, Y.W.; Hu, Y.; Wang, A.; Bao, H.; Cao, R.; Liu, K.; Wang, X.; et al. Alterations of circulating
      bacterial DNA in colorectal cancer and adenoma: A proof-of-concept study. Cancer Lett. 2021, 499, 201–208. [CrossRef]
2.    Rawla, P.; Sunkara, T.; Barsouk, A. Epidemiology of colorectal cancer: Incidence, mortality, survival, and risk factors. Prz.
      Gastroenterol. 2019, 14, 89–103. [CrossRef]
3.    Ewing, I.; Hurley, J.J.; Josephides, E.; Millar, A. The molecular genetics of colorectal cancer. Frontline Gastroenterol. 2014, 5, 26–30.
      [CrossRef]
4.    Montalban-Arques, A.; Scharl, M. Intestinal microbiota and colorectal carcinoma: Implications for pathogenesis, diagnosis,
      and therapy. EBioMedicine 2019, 48, 648–655. [CrossRef]
5.    Rezasoltani, S.; Aghdaei, H.A.; Dabiri, H.; Sepahi, A.A.; Modarressi, M.H.; Mojarad, E.N. The association between fecal microbiota
      and different types of colorectal polyp as precursors of colorectal cancer. Microb. Pathog. 2018, 124, 244–249. [CrossRef]
6.    Fong, W.; Li, Q.; Yu, J. Gut microbiota modulation: A novel strategy for prevention and treatment of colorectal cancer. Oncogene
      2020, 39, 4925–4943. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.    Iyadorai, T.; Mariappan, V.; Vellasamy, K.M.; Wanyiri, J.W.; Roslani, A.C.; Lee, G.K.; Sears, C.; Vadivelu, J. Prevalence and
      association of pks+ Escherichia coli with colorectal cancer in patients at the University Malaya Medical Centre, Malaysia.
      PLoS ONE 2020, 15, e0228217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.    Chen, W.; Liu, F.; Ling, Z.; Tong, X.; Xiang, C. Human intestinal lumen and mucosa-associated microbiota in patients with
      colorectal cancer. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e39743. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.    Zhu, Q.; Gao, R.; Wu, W.; Qin, H. The role of gut microbiota in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer. Tumor Biol. 2013, 34,
      1285–1300. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.   Kang, M.; Martin, A. Microbiome and colorectal cancer: Unraveling host-microbiota interactions in colitis-associated colorectal
      cancer development. Semin. Immunol. 2017, 32, 3–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.   Ge, Y.; Wang, X.; Guo, Y.; Yan, J.; Abuduwaili, A.; Aximujiang, K.; Yan, J.; Wu, M. Gut microbiota influence tumor development
      and Alter interactions with the human immune system. J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 2021, 40, 42. [CrossRef]
12.   Cheng, Y.; Ling, Z.; Li, L. The Intestinal Microbiota and Colorectal Cancer. Front. Immunol. 2020, 11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   Zhang, H.; Chang, Y.; Zheng, Q.; Zhang, R.; Hu, C.; Jia, W. Altered intestinal microbiota associated with colorectal cancer.
      Front. Med. 2019, 13, 461–470. [CrossRef]
14.   Cong, J.; Zhu, H.; Liu, D.; Li, T.; Zhang, C.; Zhu, J.; Lv, H.; Liu, K.; Hao, C.; Tian, Z.; et al. A Pilot Study: Changes of Gut
      Microbiota in Post-surgery Colorectal Cancer Patients. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 2777. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                                                 17 of 20




15.   Han, S.; Zhuang, J.; Wu, Y.; Wu, W.; Yang, X. Progress in Research on Colorectal Cancer-Related Microorganisms and Metabolites.
      Cancer Manag. Res. 2020, 12, 8703–8720. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.   Guinane, C.M.; Cotter, P.D. Role of the gut microbiota in health and chronic gastrointestinal disease: Understanding a hidden
      metabolic organ. Ther. Adv. Gastroenterol. 2013, 6, 295–308. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.   Mira-Pascual, L.; Cabrera-Rubio, R.; Ocon, S.; Costales, P.; Parra, A.; Suarez, A.; Moris, F.; Rodrigo, L.; Mira, A.; Collado, M.C.
      Microbial mucosal colonic shifts associated with the development of colorectal cancer reveal the presence of different bacterial
      and archaeal biomarkers. J. Gastroenterol. 2015, 50, 167–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.   Russo, E.; Bacci, G.; Chiellini, C.; Fagorzi, C.; Niccolai, E.; Taddei, A.; Ricci, F.; Ringressi, M.N.; Borrelli, R.; Melli, F.; et al. Prelimi-
      nary Comparison of Oral and Intestinal Human Microbiota in Patients with Colorectal Cancer: A Pilot Study. Front. Microbiol.
      2018, 8, 2699. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.   O’keefe, S.J. Diet, microorganisms and their metabolites, and colon cancer. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2016, 13, 691.
      [CrossRef]
20.   Chen, Y.C.; Miao, Z.F.; Yip, K.L.; Cheng, Y.A.; Liu, C.J.; Li, L.H.; Lin, C.Y.; Wang, J.W.; Wu, D.C.; Cheng, T.L.; et al. Gut Fecal
      Microbiota Transplant in a Mouse Model of Orthotopic Rectal Cancer. Front. Oncol. 2020, 10. [CrossRef]
21.   Wong, S.H.; Yu, J. Gut microbiota in colorectal cancer: Mechanisms of action and clinical applications. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol.
      Hepatol. 2019, 16, 690–704. [CrossRef]
22.   Weir, T.L.; Manter, D.K.; Sheflin, A.M.; Barnett, B.A.; Heuberger, A.L.; Ryan, E.P. Stool microbiome and metabolome differences
      between colorectal cancer patients and healthy adults. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e70803. [CrossRef]
23.   Ahn, J.; Sinha, R.; Pei, Z.; Dominianni, C.; Wu, J.; Shi, J.; Goedert, J.J.; Hayes, R.B.; Yang, L. Human Gut Microbiome and Risk for
      Colorectal Cancer. JNCI J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 2013, 105, 1907–1911. [CrossRef]
24.   Gao, Z.; Guo, B.; Gao, R.; Zhu, Q.; Qin, H. Microbiota disbiosis is associated with colorectal cancer. Front. Microbiol. 2015, 6, 20.
      [CrossRef]
25.   Moellering, R.C., Jr.; Watson, B.K.; Kunz, L.J. Endocarditis due to group D streptococci: Comparison of disease caused by
      Streptococcus bovis with that produced by the enterococci. Am. J. Med. 1974, 57, 239–250. [CrossRef]
26.   Sun, J.; Kato, I. Gut microbiota, inflammation and colorectal cancer. Genes Dis. 2016, 3, 130–143. [CrossRef]
27.   Bonnet, M.; Buc, E.; Sauvanet, P.; Darcha, C.; Dubois, D.; Pereira, B.; Déchelotte, P.; Bonnet, R.; Pezet, D.; Darfeuille-Michaud, A.
      Colonization of the human gut by E. coli and colorectal cancer risk. Clin. Cancer Res. 2014, 20, 859–867. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.   Anand, S.; Kaur, H.; Mande, S.S. Comparative In silico Analysis of Butyrate Production Pathways in Gut Commensals and
      Pathogens. Front. Microbiol. 2016, 7, 1945. [CrossRef]
29.   Martin, F.-P.; Collino, S.; Rezzi, S.; Kochhar, S. Metabolomic Applications to Decipher Gut Microbial Metabolic Influence in Health
      and Disease. Front. Physiol. 2012, 3, 113. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.   Yang, Y.; Misra, B.B.; Liang, L.; Bi, D.; Weng, W.; Wu, W.; Cai, S.; Qin, H.; Goel, A.; Li, X.; et al. Integrated microbiome and
      metabolome analysis reveals a novel interplay between commensal bacteria and metabolites in colorectal cancer. Theranostics
      2019, 9, 4101–4114. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.   Peng, Y.; Nie, Y.; Yu, J.; Wong, C.C. Microbial Metabolites in Colorectal Cancer: Basic and Clinical Implications. Metabolites 2021,
      11, 159. [CrossRef]
32.   Zeng, H.; Umar, S.; Rust, B.; Lazarova, D.; Bordonaro, M. Secondary Bile Acids and Short Chain Fatty Acids in the Colon: A Focus
      on Colonic Microbiome, Cell Proliferation, Inflammation, and Cancer. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 1214. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.   Cross, A.J.; Moore, S.C.; Boca, S.; Huang, W.-Y.; Xiong, X.; Stolzenberg-Solomon, R.; Sinha, R.; Sampson, J.N. A prospective study
      of serum metabolites and colorectal cancer risk. Cancer 2014, 120, 3049–3057. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.   Wang, G.; Yu, Y.; Wang, Y.Z.; Wang, J.J.; Guan, R.; Sun, Y.; Shi, F.; Gao, J.; Fu, X.L. Role of SCFAs in gut microbiome and glycolysis
      for colorectal cancer therapy. J. Cell. Physiol. 2019, 234, 17023–17049. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.   McBain, A.J.; Macfarlane, G.T. Ecological and physiological studies on large intestinal bacteria in relation to production of
      hydrolytic and reductive enzymes involved in formation of genotoxic metabolites. J. Med. Microbiol. 1998, 47, 407–416. [CrossRef]
36.   Lim, M.Y.; Song, E.J.; Kim, S.H.; Lee, J.; Nam, Y.D. Comparison of DNA extraction methods for human gut microbial community
      profiling. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 2018, 41, 151–157. [CrossRef]
37.   Zheng, W.; Tsompana, M.; Ruscitto, A.; Sharma, A.; Genco, R.; Sun, Y.; Buck, M.J. An accurate and efficient experimental approach
      for characterization of the complex oral microbiota. Microbiome 2015, 3, 48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.   Huang, T.Y.; Hsu, B.M.; Chao, W.C.; Fan, C.W. Plant n-alkane production from litterfall altered the diversity and community
      structure of alkane degrading bacteria in litter layer in lowland subtropical rainforest in Taiwan. Biogeosciences 2018, 15, 1815–1826.
      [CrossRef]
39.   Prodan, A.; Tremaroli, V.; Brolin, H.; Zwinderman, A.H.; Nieuwdorp, M.; Levin, E. Comparing bioinformatic pipelines for
      microbial 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. PLoS ONE 2020, 15, e0227434. [CrossRef]
40.   Parks, D.H.; Tyson, G.W.; Hugenholtz, P.; Beiko, R.G. STAMP: Statistical analysis of taxonomic and functional profiles. Bioinfor-
      matics 2014, 30, 3123–3124. [CrossRef]
41.   Eren, A.M.; Morrison, H.G.; Lescault, P.J.; Reveillaud, J.; Vineis, J.H.; Sogin, M.L. Minimum entropy decomposition: Unsupervised
      oligotyping for sensitive partitioning of high-throughput marker gene sequences. ISME J. 2015, 9, 968–979. [CrossRef]
42.   Dhariwal, A.; Chong, J.; Habib, S.; King, I.L.; Agellon, L.B.; Xia, J. MicrobiomeAnalyst: A web-based tool for comprehensive
      statistical, visual and meta-analysis of microbiome data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017, 45, W180–W188. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                                              18 of 20




43.   Douglas, G.M.; Maffei, V.J.; Zaneveld, J.; Yurgel, S.N.; Brown, J.R.; Taylor, C.M.; Huttenhower, C.; Langille, M.G.I. PICRUSt2:
      An improved and customizable approach for metagenome inference. BioRxiv 2020, 672295. [CrossRef]
44.   Kosumi, K.; Mima, K.; Baba, H.; Ogino, S. Dysbiosis of the gut microbiota and colorectal cancer: The key target of molecular
      pathological epidemiology. J. Lab. Precis. Med. 2018, 3, 76. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.   de Carvalho, A.C.; de Mattos Pereira, L.; Datorre, J.G.; Dos Santos, W.; Berardinelli, G.N.; Matsushita, M.D.M.; Oliveira, M.A.;
      Durães, R.O.; Guimarães, D.P.; Reis, R.M. Microbiota Profile and Impact of Fusobacterium nucleatum in Colorectal Cancer
      Patients of Barretos Cancer Hospital. Front. Oncol. 2019, 9. [CrossRef]
46.   Hibberd, A.A.; Lyra, A.; Ouwehand, A.C.; Rolny, P.; Lindegren, H.; Cedgård, L.; Wettergren, Y. Intestinal microbiota is altered in
      patients with colon cancer and modified by probiotic intervention. BMJ Open Gastroenterol. 2017, 4, e000145. [CrossRef]
47.   Gagnière, J.; Raisch, J.; Veziant, J.; Barnich, N.; Bonnet, R.; Buc, E.; Bringer, M.A.; Pezet, D.; Bonnet, M. Gut microbiota imbalance
      and colorectal cancer. World J. Gastroenterol. 2016, 22, 501–518. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.   Gao, Z.; Guo, B.; Gao, R.; Zhu, Q.; Wu, W.; Qin, H. Probiotics modify human intestinal mucosa-associated microbiota in patients
      with colorectal cancer. Mol. Med. Rep. 2015, 12, 6119–6127. [CrossRef]
49.   Wong, S.H.; Kwong, T.N.; Chow, T.C.; Luk, A.K.; Dai, R.Z.; Nakatsu, G.; Lam, T.Y.; Zhang, L.; Wu, J.C.; Chan, F.K.; et al.
      Quantitation of faecal Fusobacterium improves faecal immunochemical test in detecting advanced colorectal neoplasia. Gut 2017,
      66, 1441–1448. [CrossRef]
50.   Ranjbar, M.; Salehi, R.; Haghjooy Javanmard, S.; Rafiee, L.; Faraji, H.; Jafarpor, S.; Ferns, G.A.; Ghayour-Mobarhan, M.; Manian,
      M.; Nedaeinia, R. The dysbiosis signature of Fusobacterium nucleatum in colorectal cancer-cause or consequences? A systematic
      review. Cancer Cell Int. 2021, 21, 194. [CrossRef]
51.   Guo, P.; Tian, Z.; Kong, X.; Yang, L.; Shan, X.; Dong, B.; Ding, X.; Jing, X.; Jiang, C.; Jiang, N.; et al. FadA promotes DNA damage
      and progression of Fusobacterium nucleatum-induced colorectal cancer through up-regulation of chk2. J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res.
      2020, 39, 202. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.   Sobhani, I.; Tap, J.; Roudot-Thoraval, F.; Roperch, J.P.; Letulle, S.; Langella, P.; Corthier, G.; Tran Van Nhieu, J.; Furet, J.P. Microbial
      dysbiosis in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients. PLoS ONE 2011, 6, e16393. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.   O’Keefe, S.J.; Li, J.V.; Lahti, L.; Ou, J.; Carbonero, F.; Mohammed, K.; Posma, J.M.; Kinross, J.; Wahl, E.; Ruder, E.; et al. Fat, fibre
      and cancer risk in African Americans and rural Africans. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 1–14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.   Kim, Y.; Koh, I.; Rho, M. Deciphering the human microbiome using next-generation sequencing data and bioinformatics
      approaches. Methods 2015, 79, 52–59. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.   Debesa-Tur, G.; Pérez-Brocal, V.; Ruiz-Ruiz, S.; Castillejo, A.; Latorre, A.; Soto, J.L.; Moya, A. Metagenomic analysis of formalin-
      fixed paraffin-embedded tumor and normal mucosa reveals differences in the microbiome of colorectal cancer patients. Sci. Rep.
      2021, 11, 391. [CrossRef]
56.   Wu, S.; Morin, P.J.; Maouyo, D.; Sears, C.L. Bacteroides fragilis enterotoxin induces c-Myc expression and cellular proliferation.
      Gastroenterology 2003, 124, 392–400. [CrossRef]
57.   Wu, G.D.; Chen, J.; Hoffmann, C.; Bittinger, K.; Chen, Y.-Y.; Keilbaugh, S.A.; Bewtra, M.; Knights, D.; Walters, W.A.; Knight, R.;
      et al. Linking long-term dietary patterns with gut microbial enterotypes. Science 2011, 334, 105–108. [CrossRef]
58.   David, L.A.; Maurice, C.F.; Carmody, R.N.; Gootenberg, D.B.; Button, J.E.; Wolfe, B.E.; Ling, A.V.; Devlin, A.S.; Varma, Y.;
      Fischbach, M.A.; et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature 2014, 505, 559–563. [CrossRef]
59.   Larsen, J.M. The immune response to Prevotella bacteria in chronic inflammatory disease. Immunology 2017, 151, 363–374.
      [CrossRef]
60.   Roccarina, D.; Lauritano, E.C.; Gabrielli, M.; Franceschi, F.; Ojetti, V.; Gasbarrini, A. The role of methane in intestinal diseases.
      Off. J. Am. Coll. Gastroenterol. 2010, 105, 1250–1256. [CrossRef]
61.   Clos-Garcia, M.; Garcia, K.; Alonso, C.; Iruarrizaga-Lejarreta, M.; D’Amato, M.; Crespo, A.; Iglesias, A.; Cubiella, J.; Bujanda, L.;
      Falcón-Pérez, J.M. Integrative Analysis of Fecal Metagenomics and Metabolomics in Colorectal Cancer. Cancers 2020, 12, 1142.
      [CrossRef]
62.   Abell, G.C.; Conlon, M.A.; McOrist, A.L. Methanogenic archaea in adult human faecal samples are inversely related to butyrate
      concentration. Microb. Ecol. Health Dis. 2006, 18, 154–160. [CrossRef]
63.   Long, S.; Yang, Y.; Shen, C.; Wang, Y.; Deng, A.; Qin, Q.; Qiao, L. Metaproteomics characterizes human gut microbiome function
      in colorectal cancer. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes 2020, 6, 14. [CrossRef]
64.   Park, C.H.; Eun, C.S.; Han, D.S. Intestinal microbiota, chronic inflammation, and colorectal cancer. Intestig. Res. 2018, 16, 338.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.   de Macario, E.C.; Macario, A.J. Methanogenic archaea in health and disease: A novel paradigm of microbial pathogenesis. Int. J.
      Med. Microbiol. 2009, 299, 99–108.
66.   García-López, R.; Cornejo-Granados, F.; Lopez-Zavala, A.A.; Sánchez-López, F.; Cota-Huízar, A.; Sotelo-Mundo, R.R.; Guerrero,
      A.; Mendoza-Vargas, A.; Gómez-Gil, B.; Ochoa-Leyva, A. Doing more with less: A comparison of 16S hypervariable regions in
      search of defining the shrimp microbiota. Microorganisms 2020, 8, 134. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.   García-López, R.; Cornejo-Granados, F.; Lopez-Zavala, A.A.; Cota-Huízar, A.; Sotelo-Mundo, R.R.; Gómez-Gil, B.; Ochoa-Leyva, A.
      OTUs and ASVs Produce Comparable Taxonomic and Diversity from Shrimp Microbiota 16S Profiles Using Tailored Abundance
      Filters. Genes 2021, 12, 564. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                                               19 of 20




68.   Bokulich, N.A.; Kaehler, B.D.; Rideout, J.R.; Dillon, M.; Bolyen, E.; Knight, R.; Huttley, G.A.; Caporaso, J.G. Optimizing taxonomic
      classification of marker gene amplicon sequences. PeerJ Prepr. 2018, 6, e3208v3202.
69.   Xue, Z.; Kable, M.E.; Marco, M.L. Impact of DNA sequencing and analysis methods on 16S rRNA gene bacterial community
      analysis of dairy products. Msphere 2018, 3, e00410–e00418. [CrossRef]
70.   Balvočiūtė, M.; Huson, D.; Silva, R.; Greengenes, N. OTT—How do these taxonomies compare. BMC Genom. 2017, 18, 114.
      [CrossRef]
71.   Coltuc, D.; Chassery, J.M. Very fast watermarking by reversible contrast mapping. IEEE Signal Process. Lett. 2007, 14, 255–258.
      [CrossRef]
72.   Yilmaz, P.; Parfrey, L.; Yarza, P.; Gerken, J.; Pruesse, E.; Quast, C.; Schweer, T.; Peplies, J.; Ludwig, W.; Glöckner, F.O. and
      “All-species Living Tree Project (LTP)” taxonomic frameworks. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014, 42, D643–D648. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73.   Johnson, J.S.; Spakowicz, D.J.; Hong, B.Y.; Petersen, L.M.; Demkowicz, P.; Chen, L.; Leopold, S.R.; Hanson, B.M.; Agresta, H.O.;
      Gerstein, M.; et al. Evaluation of 16S rRNA gene sequencing for species and strain-level microbiome analysis. Nat. Commun.
      2019, 10, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.   Lu, J.; Salzberg, S.L. Ultrafast and accurate 16S rRNA microbial community analysis using Kraken 2. Microbiome 2020, 8, 124.
      [CrossRef]
75.   Magne, F.; Gotteland, M.; Gauthier, L.; Zazueta, A.; Pesoa, S.; Navarrete, P.; Balamurugan, R. The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes Ratio:
      A Relevant Marker of Gut Dysbiosis in Obese Patients? Nutrients 2020, 12, 1474. [CrossRef]
76.   Verdam, F.J.; Fuentes, S.; de Jonge, C.; Zoetendal, E.G.; Erbil, R.; Greve, J.W.; Buurman, W.A.; de Vos, W.M.; Rensen, S.S. Human
      intestinal microbiota composition is associated with local and systemic inflammation in obesity. Obesity 2013, 21, E607–E615.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.   Wang, T.; Cai, G.; Qiu, Y.; Fei, N.; Zhang, M.; Pang, X.; Jia, W.; Cai, S.; Zhao, L. Structural segregation of gut microbiota between
      colorectal cancer patients and healthy volunteers. ISME J. 2012, 6, 320–329. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.   Feng, Q.; Liang, S.; Jia, H.; Stadlmayr, A.; Tang, L.; Lan, Z.; Zhang, D.; Xia, H.; Xu, X.; Jie, Z.; et al. Gut microbiome development
      along the colorectal adenoma-carcinoma sequence. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 6528. [CrossRef]
79.   Geng, J.; Fan, H.; Tang, X.; Zhai, H.; Zhang, Z. Diversified pattern of the human colorectal cancer microbiome. Gut Pathog. 2013, 5,
      2. [CrossRef]
80.   Liu, W.; Zhang, R.; Shu, R.; Yu, J.; Li, H.; Long, H.; Jin, S.; Li, S.; Hu, Q.; Yao, F.; et al. Study of the Relationship between
      Microbiome and Colorectal Cancer Susceptibility Using 16SrRNA Sequencing. BioMed Res. Int. 2020, 2020, 7828392. [CrossRef]
81.   Nistal, E.; Fernández-Fernández, N.; Vivas, S.; Olcoz, J.L. Factors Determining Colorectal Cancer: The Role of the Intestinal
      Microbiota. Front. Oncol. 2015, 5, 220. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.   Bundgaard-Nielsen, C.; Baandrup, U.T.; Nielsen, L.P.; Sørensen, S. The presence of bacteria varies between colorectal adenocarci-
      nomas, precursor lesions and non-malignant tissue. BMC Cancer 2019, 19, 399. [CrossRef]
83.   Abriouel, H.; Lerma, L.L.; Casado Muñoz, M.D.C.; Montoro, B.P.; Kabisch, J.; Pichner, R.; Cho, G.S.; Neve, H.; Fusco, V.; Franz,
      C.M.A.P.; et al. The controversial nature of the Weissella genus: Technological and functional aspects versus whole genome
      analysis-based pathogenic potential for their application in food and health. Front. Microbiol. 2015, 6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.   Cielo, A.B.; Ullian, M.E. Peritonitis from Rothia mucilaginosa in a chronic peritoneal dialysis patient. Clin. Kidney J. 2013, 6,
      552–553. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85.   Osman, M.A.; Neoh, H.M.; Ab Mutalib, N.S.; Chin, S.F.; Mazlan, L.; Raja Ali, R.A.; Zakaria, A.D.; Ngiu, C.S.; Ang, M.Y.; Jamal, R.
      Parvimonas micra, Peptostreptococcus stomatis, Fusobacterium nucleatum and Akkermansia muciniphila as a four-bacteria
      biomarker panel of colorectal cancer. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 2925. [CrossRef]
86.   Sheng, Q.; Du, H.; Cheng, X.; Cheng, X.; Tang, Y.; Pan, L.; Wang, Q.; Lin, J. Characteristics of fecal gut microbiota in patients with
      colorectal cancer at different stages and different sites. Oncol. Lett. 2019, 18, 4834–4844. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87.   Mizutani, S.; Yamada, T.; Yachida, S. Significance of the gut microbiome in multistep colorectal carcinogenesis. Cancer Sci.
      2020, 111, 766–773. [CrossRef]
88.   Candela, M.; Turroni, S.; Biagi, E.; Carbonero, F.; Rampelli, S.; Fiorentini, C.; Brigidi, P. Inflammation and colorectal cancer, when
      microbiota-host mutualism breaks. World J. Gastroenterol. 2014, 20, 908–922. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.   Rosa, B.A.; Supali, T.; Gankpala, L.; Djuardi, Y.; Sartono, E.; Zhou, Y.; Fischer, K.; Martin, J.; Tyagi, R.; Bolay, F.K.; et al. Differential
      human gut microbiome assemblages during soil-transmitted helminth infections in Indonesia and Liberia. Microbiome 2018, 6, 33.
      [CrossRef]
90.   Segata, N.; Izard, J.; Waldron, L.; Gevers, D.; Miropolsky, L.; Garrett, W.S.; Huttenhower, C. Metagenomic biomarker discovery
      and explanation. Genome Biol. 2011, 12, R60. [CrossRef]
91.   Xia, Y.; Sun, J. Hypothesis testing and statistical analysis of microbiome. Genes Dis. 2017, 4, 138–148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.   Paulson, J.N.; Pop, M.; Bravo, H.C. metagenomeSeq: Statistical analysis for sparse high-throughput sequencing. Bioconductor
      Package 2013, 1, 191.
93.   Zaytseva, Y. Lipid Metabolism as a Targetable Metabolic Vulnerability in Colorectal Cancer. Cancers 2021, 13, 301. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
94.   Menendez, J.A.; Lupu, R. Fatty acid synthase and the lipogenic phenotype in cancer pathogenesis. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2007, 7,
      763–777. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548                                                                                                          20 of 20




95.  Rossi, T.; Vergara, D.; Fanini, F.; Maffia, M.; Bravaccini, S.; Pirini, F. Microbiota-Derived Metabolites in Tumor Progression and
     Metastasis. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 5786. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Nakatsu, G.; Li, X.; Zhou, H.; Sheng, J.; Wong, S.H.; Wu, W.K.K.; Ng, S.C.; Tsoi, H.; Dong, Y.; Zhang, N.; et al. Gut mucosal
     microbiome across stages of colorectal carcinogenesis. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 8727. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Zhao, Q.; Zhan, T.; Deng, Z.; Li, Q.; Liu, Y.; Yang, S.; Ji, D.; Li, Y. Glycan analysis of colorectal cancer samples reveals stage-
     dependent changes in CEA glycosylation patterns. Clin. Proteom. 2018, 15, 9. [CrossRef]
98. Koropatkin, N.M.; Cameron, E.A.; Martens, E.C. How glycan metabolism shapes the human gut microbiota. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
     2012, 10, 323–335. [CrossRef]
99. Vettore, L.; Westbrook, R.L.; Tennant, D.A. New aspects of amino acid metabolism in cancer. Br. J. Cancer 2020, 122, 150–156.
     [CrossRef]
100. Nakagami, K.; Uchida, T.; Ohwada, S.; Koibuchi, Y.; Suda, Y.; Sekine, T.; Morishita, Y. Increased Choline Kinase Activity and
     Elevated Phosphocholine Levels in Human Colon Cancer. Jpn. J. Cancer Res. 1999, 90, 419–424. [CrossRef]
101. Xiong, J.; Bian, J.; Wang, L.; Zhou, J.Y.; Wang, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Wu, L.; Hu, J.; Li, B.; Chen, S.J.; et al. Dysregulated choline metabolism
     in T-cell lymphoma: Role of choline kinase-α and therapeutic targeting. Blood Cancer J. 2015, 5, e287. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Wang, F.; Wong, S.C.; Chan, L.W.; Cho, W.; Yip, S.P.; Yung, B.Y. Multiple Regression Analysis of mRNA-miRNA Associations in
     Colorectal Cancer Pathway. BioMed Res. Int. 2014, 2014, 676724. [CrossRef]
103. Yang, J.; McDowell, A.; Kim, E.K.; Seo, H.; Lee, W.H.; Moon, C.M.; Kym, S.M.; Lee, D.H.; Park, Y.S.; Jee, Y.K.; et al. Development
     of a colorectal cancer diagnostic model and dietary risk assessment through gut microbiome analysis. Exp. Mol. Med. 2019, 51,
     1–15. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Wang, X.; Wang, J.; Rao, B.; Deng, L. Gut flora profiling and fecal metabolite composition of colorectal cancer patients and healthy
     individuals. Exp. Ther. Med. 2017, 13, 2848–2854. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Azcárate-Peril, M.A.; Sikes, M.; Bruno-Bárcena, J.M. The intestinal microbiota, gastrointestinal environment and colorectal cancer:
     A putative role for probiotics in prevention of colorectal cancer? Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 2011, 301, G401–G424.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]
