             pharmaceuticals


Article
(R,R)-BD-AcAc2 Mitigates Chronic Colitis in Rats: A Promising
Multi-Pronged Approach Modulating Inflammasome Activity,
Autophagy, and Pyroptosis
Sameh Saber 1 , Mohannad Mohammad S. Alamri 2 , Jaber Alfaifi 3 , Lobna A. Saleh 4 , Sameh Abdel-Ghany 5 ,
Adel Mohamed Aboregela 6,7 , Alshaimaa A. Farrag 8,9 , Abdulrahman H. Almaeen 10 , Masoud I. E. Adam 11 ,
AbdulElah Al Jarallah AlQahtani 12 , Ali M. S. Eleragi 13 , Mustafa Ahmed Abdel-Reheim 14,15, * ,
Heba A. Ramadan 16 and Osama A. Mohammed 4,17, *

                                         1    Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Delta University for Science and Technology,
                                              Gamasa 11152, Egypt; sampharm81@gmail.com
                                         2    Department of Family Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Bisha, Bisha 61922, Saudi Arabia;
                                              malamri@ub.edu.sa
                                         3    Department of Child Health, College of Medicine, University of Bisha, Bisha 61922, Saudi Arabia;
                                              jalfaifi@ub.edu.sa
                                         4    Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, Cairo 11566, Egypt;
                                              lobnasaleh_80@yahoo.ca
                                         5    Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University, Mansoura 35516, Egypt;
                                              samghany@mans.edu.eg
                                         6    Human Anatomy and Embryology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Zagazig University,
                                              Zagazig 44519, Egypt; amaboregela@zu.edu.eg or aaboregela@ub.edu.sa
                                         7    Basic Medical Sciences Department, College of Medicine, University of Bisha, Bisha 61922, Saudi Arabia
                                         8    Department of Histology and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut University, Assiut 71515, Egypt;
                                              alshaima@aun.edu.eg or afarraj@ub.edu.sa
Citation: Saber, S.; Alamri, M.M.S.;     9    Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, University of Bisha, Bisha 61922, Saudi Arabia
Alfaifi, J.; Saleh, L.A.; Abdel-Ghany,   10   Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Jouf University, Sakaka 72388, Saudi Arabia;
S.; Aboregela, A.M.; Farrag, A.A.;            ahalmaeen@ju.edu.sa
                                         11   Department of Medical Education and Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Bisha,
Almaeen, A.H.; Adam, M.I.E.;
AlQahtani, A.A.J.; et al.                     Bisha 61922, Saudi Arabia; mieadam@ub.edu.sa
                                         12   Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Dermatology, College of Medicine, University of Bisha,
(R,R)-BD-AcAc2 Mitigates Chronic
                                              Bisha 61922, Saudi Arabia; aaljarallah@ub.edu.sa
Colitis in Rats: A Promising             13   Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, University of Bisha, Bisha 61922, Saudi Arabia;
Multi-Pronged Approach
                                              ameleragi@ub.edu.sa
Modulating Inflammasome Activity,        14   Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Shaqra University, Shaqra 11961, Saudi Arabia
Autophagy, and Pyroptosis.               15   Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Beni-Suef University,
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953.                Beni Suef 62521, Egypt
                                         16   Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Delta University for Science and
https://doi.org/10.3390/
ph16070953                                    Technology, Gamasa 11152, Egypt; hebaaa.aadel@gmail.com
                                         17   Department of Clinical Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of Bisha, Bisha 61922, Saudi Arabia
Academic Editor: Réjean Couture          *    Correspondence: m.ahmed@su.edu.sa or darshpharmacy@yahoo.com (M.A.A.-R.);
                                              oamohamed@ub.edu.sa or osamaabbass@med.asu.edu.eg (O.A.M.)
Received: 27 May 2023
Revised: 19 June 2023
Accepted: 29 June 2023
                                         Abstract: Ulcerative colitis is a chronic and incurable form of inflammatory bowel disease that can
Published: 3 July 2023                   increase the risk of colitis-associated cancer and mortality. Limited treatment options are available for
                                         this condition, and the existing ones often come with non-tolerable adverse effects. This study is the
                                         first to examine the potential benefits of consuming (R,R)-BD-AcAc2, a type of ketone ester (KE), and
                                         intermittent fasting in treating chronic colitis induced by dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) in rats. We
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.        selected both protocols to enhance the levels of β-hydroxybutyrate, mimicking a state of nutritional
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.       ketosis and early ketosis, respectively. Our findings revealed that only the former protocol, consuming
This article is an open access article
                                         the KE, improved disease activity and the macroscopic and microscopic features of the colon while
distributed under the terms and
                                         reducing inflammation scores. Additionally, the KE counteracted the DSS-induced decrease in the
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                         percentage of weight change, reduced the colonic weight-to-length ratio, and increased the survival
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                         rate of DSS-insulted rats. KE also showed potential antioxidant activities and improved the gut
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
                                         microbiome composition. Moreover, consuming KE increased the levels of tight junction proteins that




Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953. https://doi.org/10.3390/ph16070953                                    https://www.mdpi.com/journal/pharmaceuticals
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                                 2 of 28




                                protect against leaky gut and exhibited anti-inflammatory properties by reducing proinflammatory
                                cytokine production. These effects were attributed to inhibiting NFκB and NLRP3 inflammasome
                                activation and restraining pyroptosis and apoptosis while enhancing autophagy as revealed by
                                reduced p62 and increased BECN1. Furthermore, the KE may have a positive impact on maintaining
                                a healthy microbiome. To conclude, the potential clinical implications of our findings are promising,
                                as (R,R)-BD-AcAc2 has a greater safety profile and can be easily translated to human subjects.

                                Keywords: ulcerative colitis; ketone esters; (R,R)-BD-AcAc2; NLRP3 inflammasome; pyroptosis;
                                autophagy; gut dysbiosis




                                1. Introduction
                                      Ulcerative colitis is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) that affects a large
                                number of people; unfortunately, it is not curable at present. According to an investigation
                                into the worldwide impact of IBDs, there was a significant 47.45% increase in the estimated
                                number of cases between 1990 and 2019 [1]. The total number of individuals living with
                                IBDs globally is estimated to exceed 6.8 million [2]. The reported estimates indicate that
                                the risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) in patients with ulcerative colitis (UC) is approximately
                                2% after 10 years, 8% after 20 years, and 18% after 30 years of having the disease [3].
                                According to a comprehensive cohort study conducted in Denmark, individuals with
                                severe microscopic colitis were found to have a higher risk of mortality and colorectal
                                cancer [4].
                                      In addition to reducing the quality of life, patients with this condition are at a higher
                                risk of colon cancer. While there are treatments available for this debilitating disease, they
                                only provide temporary relief and patients are likely to experience relapses over time.
                                Moreover, these treatments can have adverse effects and are often insufficient in achieving
                                long-term remission without maintenance therapy. For many patients, surgery is also a
                                reality, underscoring the urgent need for more effective treatments [5]. Risk factors for
                                ulcerative colitis include genetic susceptibility and factors that influence the gut microbiota,
                                such as antibiotic use and dietary changes, for example, extensive consumption of processed
                                foods [6].
                                      The abnormal activation of the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like recep-
                                tor protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome is a major contributor to the development of chronic
                                colitis, and therapeutic interventions targeting NLRP3 have demonstrated significant effi-
                                cacy in delaying or preventing disease onset [7]. Inflammasomes are a class of cytosolic
                                protein complexes that can detect a variety of stressors, exogenous pathogens, and endoge-
                                nous danger signals, triggering activation of caspase-1, and subsequent production of IL-1β
                                and IL-18, thereby initiating the inflammatory process. The priming signal required for
                                inflammasome activation converges on the activation of nuclear transcription factor kappa
                                B (NFκB) and the transcriptional induction of NLRP3 and pro-IL-1β. The activating signal,
                                which may be a danger signal, can directly activate inflammasome assembly [8]. Several
                                mechanisms have been proposed to explain the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome,
                                including the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [9]. Moreover, downstream of
                                the NLRP3 inflammasome activation, gasdermin D (GSDMD) cleavage and membrane
                                pore-formation has also been observed [10]. The process of pyroptosis, a highly inflam-
                                matory type of programmed cell death, is largely dependent on the cleavage of GSDMD,
                                as this cleavage releases the gasdermin D N-terminal fragment (NGSDMD) which carries
                                inherent pyroptosis-inducing capabilities [11]. In addition, The NLRP3 inflammasome has
                                been identified as playing a significant role in coordinating host physiology and immunity,
                                and researchers are actively studying its interactions with the gut microbiota [12]. Recent
                                studies have suggested that dysregulation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in response to
                                changes in the gut microbiota could contribute to the development of chronic colitis [13].
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                           3 of 28




                                      Autophagy is a vital cellular process that removes unnecessary or dysfunctional com-
                                ponents through a regulated lysosome-dependent mechanism [14]. It is involved in several
                                pathological processes and plays a significant role in various diseases [15]. Recent research
                                indicates that autophagy dysregulation in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) contributes to
                                the development and progression of IBDs [16]. Additionally, autophagy has emerged as a
                                potential drug target for managing colitis [17,18] and colitis-associated cancer [19,20]. In
                                particular, targeting autophagy ablation in IECs increases epithelial apoptosis and aggra-
                                vates inflammatory pathology [21]. These findings imply that manipulating autophagy
                                may be a viable therapeutic approach for the management of chronic colitis.
                                      β-hydroxybutyrate is a ketone body metabolite primarily produced by the brain, liver,
                                heart, and skeletal muscles during caloric restriction, fasting, or a low-carbohydrate keto-
                                genic diet (KD) [22]. Additionally, β-hydroxybutyrate and its producing stimuli, such as
                                fasting and KD, have been shown to possess the ability to improve pro-inflammatory re-
                                sponses. Studies have demonstrated that β-hydroxybutyrate can alleviate pro-inflammatory
                                responses in Parkinson’s disease both in vitro and in vivo [23]. Several studies have shown
                                the beneficial effects of intermittent fasting and calorie restriction on mitigating neuroin-
                                flammation and sickness behavior induced by lipopolysaccharide [24,25]. Moreover, a
                                low-carbohydrate KD has been found to reduce tissue inflammatory responses in both
                                juvenile and adult rats [26]. These effects are attributed to the ability of β-hydroxybutyrate
                                to inhibit the NLRP3 inflammasome, which reduces the production of pro-inflammatory
                                cytokines [22].
                                      The brief half-life of β-hydroxybutyrate brings up concerns about its practicality as
                                a potential treatment for humans. Moreover, the therapeutic use of this approach in a
                                clinical environment may not be financially feasible. There have been cases where β-
                                hydroxybutyrate was administered orally to two infants aged six months with persistent
                                hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia for 5 and 7 months. Despite receiving high doses of up to
                                32 g/day, these patients reportedly tolerated the treatment well without experiencing any
                                adverse effects [27].
                                      However, ketone esters (KEs), such as (R,R)-BD-AcAc2, offer an alternative source of
                                ketones to boost blood β-hydroxybutyrate levels. Once ingested, KEs are broken down
                                and metabolized, releasing ketone bodies into the bloodstream. This mimics the effects
                                of fasting or adhering to a KD by increasing plasma β-hydroxybutyrate levels. Notably,
                                KE supplementation can significantly enhance plasma β-hydroxybutyrate levels, even
                                when consuming a regular diet. The effects of KEs appear to depend on the dosage
                                and can endure for several hours after ingestion. Researchers are exploring the potential
                                therapeutic benefits of KEs in conditions like epilepsy [28] and Alzheimer’s disease [29],
                                where increasing ketone levels could be advantageous. Some individuals also use KEs to
                                achieve nutritional ketosis without following a strict ketogenic diet. Thus, consuming KEs
                                can be an effective pharmacological approach to raising plasma β-hydroxybutyrate levels.
                                      In addition, It has been suggested that β-hydroxybutyrate may regulate the gut
                                microflora through indirect mechanisms that have yet to be fully understood [30]. While
                                it is widely believed that β-hydroxybutyrate plays a crucial role in the gut microbiome,
                                research directly studying its effects on the gut microflora is still very limited and its
                                mechanism is not well characterized. However, studies have shown that KD can impact
                                gut microbiota composition [31]. Therefore, it is possible that both intermittent fasting
                                and KE consumption, as methods to boost β-hydroxybutyrate production, may lead to
                                β-hydroxybutyrate-induced changes in the microbiome composition. Interestingly, the
                                present study may help to shed light on the potential implications of these changes.
                                      To avoid the need for dietary changes, supplements like KEs have been developed
                                to mimic the effects of ketosis, as an alternative to KD. However, the use of exogenous
                                ketone supplements for treating ulcerative colitis in humans and animals has not been
                                thoroughly and directly evaluated in trials. Although the current evidence indicates that
                                KDs can be a feasible approach, further research is urgently needed to determine the
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                                             4 of 28




                                 optimal methods, understand the underlying mechanisms, establish dosage and safety
                                 guidelines, and promote the widespread adoption of this strategy for treating colitis.
                                       In this study, we have introduced a novel approach and potential treatment option
                                 that could improve the chances of long-lasting success against a prevalent type of IBD.
                                 Our research has presented preclinical data and explained the molecular mechanism
                                 behind utilizing the KE known as (R,R)-BD-AcAc2, for the development of a new IBD
                                 therapy. This treatment approach involves targeting the NLRP3 inflammasome and its
                                 downstream signaling molecules, inhibiting pyroptosis and inducing autophagy. We
                                 conducted preliminary trials to determine doses of (R,R)-BD-AcAc2 that successfully elevate
                                 blood levels of β-hydroxybutyrate to mimic a state of nutritional ketosis. Furthermore, 16
                                 h of intermittent fasting in rats succeeded in boosting blood levels of β-hydroxybutyrate,
                                 mimicking a state of early ketosis.
                                       This study is the first to examine the potential advantages of consuming (R,R)-BD-
                                 AcAc2, a type of KE, in comparison to intermittent fasting for treating chronic colitis
                                 induced by dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) in rats. Both protocols were selected to enhance
                                 the levels of β-hydroxybutyrate. Our findings provide important insights into a promising
                                 multi-pronged approach for achieving long-lasting remission in chronic colitis. The poten-
                                 tial clinical implications of our findings are bolstered by the greater safety profile of KEs,
                                 which enhances their translatability to human subjects.

                                 2. Results
                                 2.1. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on the Microscopic Characteristics of
                                 Chronic Colitis Induced by DSS
                                              As depicted in Figure 1, the histopathological assessment of the N, N/F, and N/KE
                                        groups (A, B, and C) revealed regular rounded mucus-secreting colonic glands with goblet
                                        cells, indicating normal mucosal architecture with normal crypt bases and arrangement.
                                        In contrast, sections from the CC and CC/F groups (Dand E) displayed submucosal
                                        edema, inflamed mucosa, distortion of architecture, complete destruction of colonic glands,
                                        and loss of goblet cells. Submucosal congestion and fibrotic tissue deposition were also
                                        observed, along with mucosal and submucosal focal and diffuse inflammatory infiltrates
                                        of lymphocytes, macrophages, eosinophils, and plasma cells. The ulcerated area from
                                        the CC/KE group (F) showed improvement in the structure of the mucosa, with the
                                        appearance of glands and crypts, a lower level of focal inflammatory cell infiltrate, and
                                        a clear submucosa of very low degree of inflammatory cell infiltration, while edema still
                                        existed. Less congestion and collagen deposition in the submucosa were also 5observed
       Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                      of 29
                                                                                                                                in
                                        this group. These findings were also confirmed upon the assessment of the inflammation
                                        score (G).




                                 Figure
                                    Figure     Theimpact
                                         1. 1.The    impact of KE ingestion
                                                            of KE  ingestionand
                                                                              and intermittent
                                                                                intermittent     fasting
                                                                                             fasting on the the microscopic
                                                                                                         on microscopic       characteristics
                                                                                                                        characteristics of    of
                                    chronic
                                 chronic     colitis
                                         colitis      induced
                                                 induced    byby DSS.
                                                               DSS. AA   histopathologicalevaluation
                                                                      histopathological    evaluationwas
                                                                                                       wasconducted  on the
                                                                                                           conducted on         N/F, and
                                                                                                                             N, N/F,
                                                                                                                         the N,       and N/KE
                                    N/KE groups (A–C, respectively), which demonstrate normal colonic gland structure characterized
                                    by rounded mucus-secreting glands (black arrows), with goblet cells present (red arrows). Addi-
                                    tionally, normal mucosal architecture is observed with normal crypt bases and arrangement (green
                                    arrows). However, CC (D) and CC/F (E) groups exhibit submucosal edema (blue arrow), inflamed
                                    mucosa (light gray arrow), distorted architecture, great destruction of colonic glands, and loss of
                                    goblet cells (dark gray arrow). Submucosal congestion and deposition of fibrotic tissue are evident
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                                 5 of 28




                                groups (A–C, respectively), which demonstrate normal colonic gland structure characterized by
                                rounded mucus-secreting glands (black arrows), with goblet cells present (red arrows). Additionally,
                                normal mucosal architecture is observed with normal crypt bases and arrangement (green arrows).
                                However, CC (D) and CC/F (E) groups exhibit submucosal edema (blue arrow), inflamed mucosa
                                (light gray arrow), distorted architecture, great destruction of colonic glands, and loss of goblet
                                cells (dark gray arrow). Submucosal congestion and deposition of fibrotic tissue are evident (dark
                                blue arrows). Furthermore, there are focal and diffuse inflammatory infiltrates of lymphocytes,
                                macrophages, eosinophils, and plasma cells in the mucosal and submucosal layers (black arrowheads).
                                Panel (F) indicates an improvement in the structure of the mucosa in the ulcerated area of the CC/KE
                                group. The appearance of glands and crypts (red arrowheads) indicates improved mucosal structure,
                                with a lower level of focal inflammatory cell infiltration (black arrowhead) and clear submucosa with
                                a very low degree of inflammatory cell infiltration (yellow arrowhead), although edema persisted
                                (blue arrow). Additionally, there are less congestion and collagen deposition in the submucosa (black
                                arrows). The scale bar is 100 µm. The inflammation score is shown in panel (G), with significance
                                levels indicated by pairwise comparisons. ****, p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant.


                                2.2. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on the Mean Percentage Body Weight
                                Change and Colon Weight/Length Ratio
                                      The percentage change in body weight in animal models can be a useful measure for
                                determining the severity of colitis. This is due to the fact that colitis can promote weight
                                loss through a number of processes, including decreased food intake, malabsorption, and
                                increased energy expenditure as a result of inflammation. We can quantify the activity and
                                severity of a disease objectively by tracking changes in body weight over time. Figure 2A
                                illustrates the progressive body weight changes among different groups during the ex-
                                perimental period, while Figure 2B shows that both fasting and KE ingestion resulted in
                                a significant decrease in body weight compared with normal rats. The study found that
                                fasting resulted in a significant decrease in the percentage of body weight change in rats
                                with chronic colitis when compared with the CC group. Similarly, the ingestion of KE, and
                                not intermittent fasting, led to a significant reduction in the percentage of body weight
                                change in rats with chronic colitis when compared with the CC group. These results suggest
                                that KE ingestion may be effective in preventing body weight loss induced by chronic DSS
                                administration. Additionally, the weight-to-length ratio of the colon is commonly used as
                                an indicator of colitis severity in animal models, particularly in pre-clinical trials of new
                                drugs for ulcerative colitis. Lower final ratios are associated with greater effectiveness
                                in reducing severity. The results of the study demonstrated that KE consumption signifi-
                                cantly decreased the final colon weight-to-length ratio in contrast to the CC group of rats,
                                demonstrating KE’s efficacy in lowering the severity of colitis (as shown in Figure 2C).

                                2.3. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on the Disease Activity Index and
                                Macroscopic Damage Index
                                      The DAI provides a composite score of colitis severity based on the selected parameters
                                of weight loss, stool consistency, and rectal bleeding. The DAI supplements other metrics
                                like colon weight-to-length ratio and provides an aggregate quantitative measure of colitis
                                severity from different perspectives to complement other evaluations. Based on our findings
                                as shown in Figure 3A, we observed that the DAI significantly increased in the CC group of
                                rats compared with the normal values. However, the rats from the CC/KE group displayed
                                a significant reduction in the score compared with the CC group. On the other hand, the
                                CC/F group did not show a significant change in the DAI compared with that of the CC
                                group. These results indicate that the KE-induced increases in the β-hydroxybutyrate are
                                significantly linked to a reduction in the colitis severity. This suggests that boosting ketone
                                production helps reduce colitis severity as measured by the DAI.
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                               6 of 29




                                    of rats, demonstrating KE’s eﬃcacy in lowering the severity of colitis (as shown in Figure
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                            6 of 28
                                    2C).




                                    Figure 2. The impact of KE ingestion and intermittent fasting on three parameters: (A) the mean
                                     Figure 2. The impact of KE ingestion and intermittent fasting on three parameters: (A) the mean
 Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW body weight change, (B) the mean percentage body weight change on day 24, and (C)
                                    percentage                                                                                            7 ofthe
                                                                                                                                                29
                                     percentage
                                    colon        body weight
                                           weight/length   ratiochange,   (B) the
                                                                 in rats with     mean
                                                                              chronic   percentage
                                                                                      colitis inducedbody  weight
                                                                                                      by DSS.       change
                                                                                                                Pairwise     on day 24, indicate
                                                                                                                          comparisons    and (C)
                                     the colon weight/length ratio in rats with chronic colitis induced by DSS. Pairwise comparisons in-
                                    significance levels between groups. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ****, p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant.
                                     dicate significance levels between groups. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ****, p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant.

                                    2.3. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on the Disease Activity Index and
                                    Macroscopic Damage Index
                                         The DAI provides a composite score of colitis severity based on the selected param-
                                    eters of weight loss, stool consistency, and rectal bleeding. The DAI supplements other
                                    metrics like colon weight-to-length ratio and provides an aggregate quantitative measure
                                    of colitis severity from diﬀerent perspectives to complement other evaluations. Based on
                                    our findings as shown in Figure 3A, we observed that the DAI significantly increased in
                                    the CC group of rats compared with the normal values. However, the rats from the CC/KE
                                    group displayed a significant reduction in the score compared with the CC group. On the
                                    other hand, the CC/F group did not show a significant change in the DAI compared with
                                    that of the CC group. These results indicate that the KE-induced increases in the β-hy-
                                    droxybutyrate are significantly linked to a reduction in the colitis severity. This suggests
                                    that boosting ketone production helps reduce colitis severity as measured by the DAI.
                                         In addition, the macroscopic damage index provides an additional objective measure
                                    of colonic damage that supplements other metrics. It evaluates colitis severity from the
                                    perspective of macroscopic colon abnormalities. Our findings (Figure 3B) showed that the
                                    MDI in the CC group of rats significantly increased compared with the normal values.
                                    When compared with the CC group, however, the rats from the CC/KE group showed a
                                    significant decline in scores. The MDI did not significantly vary between the CC group
                                    and the CC/F group, on the other hand. These findings suggest that a decrease in the se-
                                    verity of colitis is highly correlated with KE-induced elevations in the β-hydroxybutyrate.



                                    Figure 3. The impact of KE ingestion and intermittent fasting on the disease activity index (A) and
                                     Figure 3. The impact of KE ingestion and intermittent fasting on the disease activity index (A) and
                                    macroscopic damage index (B) in rats with chronic colitis induced by DSS. Pairwise comparisons
                                     macroscopic damage index (B) in rats with chronic colitis induced by DSS. Pairwise comparisons
                                    show
                                     showthe
                                          thesignificance
                                               significancelevels
                                                            levelsbetween
                                                                   betweenthe
                                                                           thegroups.  ****,pp<<0.0001;
                                                                               groups.****,      0.0001;ns,
                                                                                                         ns,non-significant.
                                                                                                             non-significant.

                                     2.4. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on the Survival Property
                                          Survival analysis is a significant statistical method for assessing the eﬀectiveness of
                                     treatments for colitis. This approach analyzes the time it takes for an event to occur, and
                                     a longer time for the event with the experimental treatment indicates a higher level of
                                     eﬀectiveness. Additionally, hazard ratios derived from survival analysis measure the risk
    Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                                       7 of 28




                                          In addition, the macroscopic damage index provides an additional objective measure
                                     of colonic damage that supplements other metrics. It evaluates colitis severity from the
                                     perspective of macroscopic colon abnormalities. Our findings (Figure 3B) showed that
                                     the MDI in the CC group of rats significantly increased compared with the normal values.
                                     When compared with the CC group, however, the rats from the CC/KE group showed a
                                     significant decline in scores. The MDI did not significantly vary between the CC group and
                                     the CC/F group, on the other hand. These findings suggest that a decrease in the severity
                                     of colitis is highly correlated with KE-induced elevations in the β-hydroxybutyrate.

                                      2.4. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on the Survival Property
                                          Survival analysis is a significant statistical method for assessing the effectiveness
                                     of treatments for colitis. This approach analyzes the time it takes for an event to occur,
                                     and a longer time for the event with the experimental treatment indicates a higher level
                                     of effectiveness. Additionally, hazard ratios derived from survival analysis measure the
                                     risk of experiencing an adverse event, such as death, in one treatment group compared
                                     with another. The log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test was used to compare individual survival
                                     analyses between the DSS-exposed rats (CC group) and the CC/F or CC/KE groups
                                     of rats. The outcomes showed no statistically significant difference in the likelihood of
                                     survival between the CC group and the CC/F group (Figure 4A). Contrarily, our research
                                     showed that the DSS-exposed rats’ survival rate considerably increased after receiving KE
                                     (Figure 4B; p = 0.045). Additionally, the CC and CC/KE groups’ hazard ratio (log-rank)
                                     was 2.92 (95 percent CI of ratio 1.096 to 7.785). The increased survivability in colitic rats of
                                     KE-induced β-hydroxybutyrate plasma levels suggests that increasing ketone availability
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, x FOR PEER may
                                    REVIEW be a viable treatment for colitis. The findings suggest that ketones may have anti-8 of 29
                                     inflammatory, bioenergetic, and maybe protective cellular effects that could delay disease
                                     progression, lessen the severity, and prolong remission.




                                      Figure4.4.Survival
                                    Figure                analysis comparisons
                                                 Survivalanalysis  comparisons between
                                                                                    betweenthe
                                                                                             theCCCCgroup
                                                                                                      groupand  thethe
                                                                                                              and    CC/F  group
                                                                                                                        CC/F          andand
                                                                                                                                  (A)(A)
                                                                                                                              group         the the CC
                                    group and CC/KE group (B), show the impact of KE ingestion
                                      CC  group   and CC/KE   group   (B), show  the  impact of KE ingestion  and   intermittent fasting on
                                                                                                                   intermittent fasting on  thethe sur-
                                    vival property
                                      survival       in rats
                                                property     with
                                                         in rats  chronic
                                                                 with        colitis
                                                                       chronic colitis inducedby
                                                                                     induced       DSS.The
                                                                                                byDSS.  The log-rank    (Mantel–Cox)test
                                                                                                             log-rank (Mantel–Cox)      test
                                                                                                                                           waswas used
                                    toused to
                                       determine    individual
                                               determine         survival
                                                          individual         analyses.
                                                                      survival  analyses.Pairwise
                                                                                          Pairwisecomparisons      indicatesignificance
                                                                                                    comparisons indicate     significance    levels be-
                                                                                                                                         levels
                                    tween  groups.
                                      between   groups.

                                      2.5. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on Oxidative Stress Parameters
                                    2.5. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on Oxidative Stress Parameters
                                          Oxidative stress indicators can offer important insights into the severity and develop-
                                     mentOxidative
                                           of colitis. stress
                                                       Lipids,indicators  can oﬀer
                                                               proteins, DNA,         important
                                                                               and other   molecules  insights
                                                                                                          becomeinto  the severity
                                                                                                                   oxidatively       and devel-
                                                                                                                                damaged
                                     when of
                                    opment      colitis.
                                           oxidants    andLipids,  proteins,
                                                            antioxidants      DNA,
                                                                         are out  of and    other Colitis
                                                                                    equilibrium.      molecules    become
                                                                                                              severity               with dam-
                                                                                                                             oxidatively
                                                                                                                       is correlated
                                    aged
                                     the when    oxidants
                                         degree of           andstress.
                                                      oxidative   antioxidants    are outinofcolitis,
                                                                         Additionally,         equilibrium.     Colitis
                                                                                                       the levels of     severity
                                                                                                                     lipid         is correlated
                                                                                                                            peroxidation
                                    with the such
                                     productsdegreeasof  MDA   are elevated.
                                                           oxidative  stress.This increase in in
                                                                              Additionally,    MDA is     indicative
                                                                                                   colitis, the      of of
                                                                                                                 levels greater oxidative
                                                                                                                            lipid  peroxidation
                                     damage to
                                    products      theas MDA
                                               such    membranes,are which   suggests
                                                                     elevated.  This a    more in
                                                                                      increase   severe    inflammatory
                                                                                                       MDA is              response
                                                                                                                 indicative of        and oxida-
                                                                                                                                 greater
                                    tive damage to the membranes, which suggests a more severe inflammatory response and
                                    compromise to the gastrointestinal barrier. Our results revealed a significant increase in
                                    the levels of ROS (Figure 5A) and MDA (Figure 5B) in response to DSS exposure compared
                                    with those of the normal rats. In contrast, KE ingestion significantly suppressed the DSS-
                                      Oxidative stress indicators can oﬀer important insights into the severity and devel-
                                opment of colitis. Lipids, proteins, DNA, and other molecules become oxidatively dam-
                                aged when oxidants and antioxidants are out of equilibrium. Colitis severity is correlated
                                with the degree of oxidative stress. Additionally, in colitis, the levels of lipid peroxidation
                                products such as MDA are elevated. This increase in MDA is indicative of greater oxida-
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                                         8 of 28
                                tive damage to the membranes, which suggests a more severe inflammatory response and
                                compromise to the gastrointestinal barrier. Our results revealed a significant increase in
                                the levels of ROS (Figure 5A) and MDA (Figure 5B) in response to DSS exposure compared
                                   compromise to the gastrointestinal barrier. Our results revealed a significant increase in the
                                with  those
                                   levels     of the
                                          of ROS      normal
                                                    (Figure   5A)rats.
                                                                    andInMDA contrast,
                                                                                 (Figure KE  ingestion
                                                                                           5B)           significantly
                                                                                                in response               suppressed
                                                                                                             to DSS exposure            the DSS-
                                                                                                                                 compared
                                induced    increase    in  these    levels.   Enzymatic     antioxidants,    such    as superoxide
                                   with those of the ormal rats. In contrast, KE ingestion significantly uppressed the DSS-           dismutase
                                (SOD)   play a
                                   induced       critical
                                             increase   in role
                                                            thesein   regulating
                                                                    levels.          oxidant
                                                                             Enzymatic          levels. such
                                                                                          antioxidants, Reduced as activity
                                                                                                                    superoxideof these  enzymes
                                                                                                                                 dismutase
                                impairs
                                   (SOD)their
                                           play ability
                                                   criticaltorole
                                                              control    reactiveoxidant
                                                                   in regulating    oxygen/nitrogen       species
                                                                                             levels. Reduced        levels,
                                                                                                                activity    thereby
                                                                                                                         of these     worsening
                                                                                                                                  enzymes
                                theimpairs  their
                                     severity  of ability
                                                   colitis.toAlso,
                                                               control  reactive
                                                                      during       oxygen/nitrogen
                                                                               colitis,                species levels,
                                                                                         there is a depletion     of thethereby  worsening
                                                                                                                          essential  antioxidant
                                   the severity of
                                glutathione    (GSH).colitis.
                                                          ThisAlso,   during
                                                                 results    in colitis, there is a
                                                                                increased          depletion of
                                                                                             susceptibility    ofthe  essential
                                                                                                                   cells        antioxidant
                                                                                                                         to oxidative    damage.
                                   glutathione (GSH). This results in increased susceptibility of cells to oxidative damage. We
                                We revealed a significant reduction in the levels of SOD (Figure 5C) and GSH (Figure 5D)
                                   revealed a significant reduction in the levels of SOD (Figure 5C) and GSH (Figure 5D) in
                                in response to DSS exposure compared with those of the normal rats. In contrast, KE in-
                                   response to DSS exposure compared with those of the normal rats. In contrast, KE ingestion
                                gestion  significantly
                                   significantly  suppressedsuppressed      the DSS-induced
                                                                  the DSS-induced       decrease indecrease   in these levels.
                                                                                                     these levels.




                                Figure 5. 5.
                                   Figure Impact
                                             Impactof of
                                                      KEKE
                                                         ingestion  and
                                                            ingestion andintermittent
                                                                           intermittentfasting
                                                                                        fasting on
                                                                                                on oxidative stress markers:
                                                                                                   oxidative stress markers: reactive
                                                                                                                              reactive oxy-
                                gen species (ROS) (A), malondialdehyde (MDA) (B), superoxide dismutase (SOD) (C), andand
                                   oxygen  species  (ROS) (A), malondialdehyde   (MDA)    (B), superoxide  dismutase (SOD)   (C),  reduced
                                   reduced glutathione (GSH) (D) in rats with chronic colitis induced by DSS. Pairwise comparisons
                                   indicate significance levels between groups. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001; ****, p < 0.0001;
                                   ns, non-significant.

                                   2.6. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on the Plasma Levels of
                                   B-Hydroxybutyrate
                                        At the end of the fasting period, the selected intermittent fasting protocol resulted in
                                   a significant increase in the β-hydroxybutyrate levels compared with normal non-fasting
                                   rats (adjusted p value = 0.043, 95% CI of difference −0.9895 to −0.01063), indicating
                                   a state resembling early ketosis. Conversely, ingestion of KE resulted in a significant
                                   increase in the β-hydroxybutyrate levels compared with normal non-fasting rats (adjusted
                                   p value < 0.0001, 95% CI of difference −3.525 to −2.546) indicating a state resembling
                                   nutritional ketosis. In contrast, chronic administration of DSS in the CC rat group did
                                   not significantly alter β-hydroxybutyrate levels compared with normal rats. Additionally,
                                   intermittent fasting in the CC/F rat group resulted in a significant increase in the levels
                                   of β-hydroxybutyrate compared with those of CC rats (adjusted p value = 0.02). Similarly,
                                   KE ingestion in CC/KE rat group resulted in a significant increase in the levels of β-
                                   hydroxybutyrate when compared with those of CC rats (adjusted p value < 0.0001). Overall,
                                   these findings (illustrated in Figure 6) suggest that both intermittent fasting for 16 h per
                                   day and KE ingestion elevated β-hydroxybutyrate levels beyond normal levels, inducing a
                                   state resembling early and nutritional ketosis, respectively.
                                ate compared with those of CC rats (adjusted p value = 0.02). Similarly, KE ingestion in
                                CC/KE rat group resulted in a significant increase in the levels of β-hydroxybutyrate when
                                compared with those of CC rats (adjusted p value < 0.0001). Overall, these findings (illustrated
                                in Figure 6) suggest that both intermittent fasting for 16 h per day and KE ingestion ele-
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953   vated β-hydroxybutyrate levels beyond normal levels, inducing a state         resembling
                                                                                                                   9 of 28 early
                                and nutritional ketosis, respectively.




                                  Figure 6. The impact of KE ingestion and intermittent fasting on plasma levels of β-hydroxybutyrate
                                Figure
                                  in  rats 6. The
                                           with    impact
                                                chronic      of KE
                                                          colitis    ingestion
                                                                  induced by DSS.  intermittent
                                                                               andSignificance levels are on
                                                                                                  fastingindicated by levels
                                                                                                              plasma            β-hydroxybutyrate
                                                                                                                             ofcomparisons.
                                                                                                                      pairwise
                                in*, rats with  chronic    colitis induced  by DSS.
                                     p < 0.05; ****, p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant. Significance levels are indicated  by pairwise comparisons.
                                *, p < 0.05; ****, p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant.
                                  2.7. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on Different Cytokines as
                                  Inflammation Markers
                                       In the CC group, chronic administration of DSS resulted in a significant increase in the
                                 levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α (Figure 7A), IL-6 (Figure 7B), IL-1β (Figure 7C),
                                 and IL-18 (Figure 7D), and a significant increase in the levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines
                                 IL-10 (Figure 7E) and IL-4 (Figure 7F), compared with those in normal rats. However, the
                                 ingestion of KE had a significant impact on the reversal of DSS-induced changes in cytokine
                                 levels in the CC/KE groups, compared with the CC groups. Specifically, TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β,
                                 IL-18, and IL-4 levels were significantly reduced, while IL-10 levels remained unchanged.
                                 Chronic colitis is known to be associated with an increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines,
                                 which contribute to persistent inflammation and colon tissue damage. The elevation of
                                 IL-1β and IL-18 levels suggests inflammasome activation, which is believed to be involved
                                 in chronic colitis. The higher levels of IL-10 and IL-4 in CC groups indicated a shift
                                 towards a Th2-mediated immune response. These cytokines are produced by various
                                 immune cells, including Th2 cells, Tregs, and macrophages, which are activated in chronic
                                 colitis. It is worth noting that cytokine levels were not significantly altered in rats that
                                 underwent intermittent fasting and were treated with DSS, compared with non-fasting rats
                                 that received DSS treatment.
                                is believed to be involved in chronic colitis. The higher levels of IL-10 and IL-4 in CC
                                groups indicated a shift towards a Th2-mediated immune response. These cytokines are
                                produced by various immune cells, including Th2 cells, Tregs, and macrophages, which
                                are activated in chronic colitis. It is worth noting that cytokine levels were not significantly
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953
                                altered in rats that underwent intermittent fasting and were treated with DSS,10compared
                                                                                                                      of 28
                                with non-fasting rats that received DSS treatment.




                                  Figure
                                Figure             impact of
                                              Theimpact
                                        7.7.The           of KE
                                                             KE ingestion
                                                                 ingestionandandintermittent fasting
                                                                                   intermittent       on tumor
                                                                                                  fasting       necrosis
                                                                                                           on tumor      factor-alpha
                                                                                                                      necrosis         (TNF-α) (TNF-
                                                                                                                                 factor-alpha
                                  (A), IL-6  (B), IL-1β (C), IL-18 (D), IL-10 (E), and
                                α) (A), IL-6 (B), IL-1β (C), IL-18 (D), IL-10 (E), and IL-4 (F) levels in rats with chronic colitisby
                                                                                       IL-4 (F) levels in rats with chronic colitis induced induced
                                  DSS. Significance levels are indicated by pairwise comparisons. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001;
                                  ****, p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant.

                                  2.8. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on the Activities of Each Mpo, Nfκb Dna
                                  Binding, Caspase-1, and the Levels of Active Caspase-3
                                        In chronic colitis, sustained activation of neutrophils leads to the release of MPO,
                                  which contributes to tissue damage by generating ROS and other reactive intermediates.
                                  The increased levels of NFκB in chronic colitis promote the sustained production of pro-
                                  inflammatory cytokines, thereby perpetuating the inflammatory response. NFκB activates
                                  the expression of genes involved in cytokine production, such as TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β,
                                  which recruit immune cells and further damage the tissue. In chronic colitis, increased activ-
                                  ity of caspase-1 leads to the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and the perpetuation
                                  of the inflammatory response. Caspase-1 processes the bioactivation of IL-1β and IL-18,
                                  which stimulate immune cells and promote tissue damage. Similarly, increased activity of
                                  caspase-3 in chronic colitis contributes to tissue damage and disease progression by induc-
                                  ing apoptosis and subsequent loss of epithelial cells. Apoptosis of intestinal epithelial cells
                                  leads to disruption of the intestinal barrier and increased permeability, allowing luminal
                                  antigens and bacteria to enter the mucosa and trigger further inflammation. Additionally,
                                and IL-18, which stimulate immune cells and promote tissue damage. Similarly, increased
                                activity of caspase-3 in chronic colitis contributes to tissue damage and disease progres-
                                sion by inducing apoptosis and subsequent loss of epithelial cells. Apoptosis of intestinal
                                epithelial cells leads to disruption of the intestinal barrier and increased permeability, al-
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953   lowing luminal antigens and bacteria to enter the mucosa and trigger further 11 of 28        inflamma-
                                tion. Additionally, caspase-3-mediated apoptosis of immune cells can contribute to the
                                dysregulation of the immune response and perpetuation of inflammation. Our results re-
                                   caspase-3-mediated
                                vealed that              apoptosis
                                               the activities  of of
                                                                   MPO immune
                                                                          (Figurecells8A),
                                                                                       can NFκB
                                                                                           contribute
                                                                                                   DNAto the dysregulation
                                                                                                           binding              the and
                                                                                                                     (Figureof8B),
                                caspase-1    response8C),
                                   immune (Figure      and and
                                                           perpetuation  of of
                                                                 the levelsinflammation.
                                                                                active Our      results
                                                                                         caspase-3      revealed
                                                                                                     (Figure  8D)that the activities
                                                                                                                   were    significantly
                                   of MPO in
                                increased   (Figure  8A), NFκB
                                               the chronic      DNA
                                                            colitis ratbinding  (Figure 8B),with
                                                                        group compared       and caspase-1   (Figure
                                                                                                   normal rats.       8C), andingestion
                                                                                                                  However,      the
                                   levels of active caspase-3 (Figure 8D) were significantly increased in the chronic colitis rat
                                of KE significantly reversed the DSS-induced alterations in their levels, while intermittent
                                   group compared with normal rats. However, ingestion of KE significantly reversed the
                                fasting  did not significantly alter their levels in the CC/F group compared with the CC
                                   DSS-induced alterations in their levels, while intermittent fasting did not significantly alter
                                group.
                                   their levels in the CC/F group compared with the CC group.




                                Figure  8. 8.
                                   Figure  TheThe impactof
                                                 impact          ingestionand
                                                          of KE ingestion    and   intermittent
                                                                                intermittent         fasting
                                                                                                fasting on theon the   activities
                                                                                                                activities of each of each  myeloperoxi-
                                                                                                                                   myeloperoxidase
                                dase  (MPO)
                                   (MPO)   (A),(A),  nuclear
                                                 nuclear      transcription
                                                         transcription   factorfactor  kappa
                                                                                 kappa B   (NFκB) B (NFκB)     DNA (B),
                                                                                                      DNA binding      binding   (B), (C),
                                                                                                                             caspase-1caspase-1
                                                                                                                                            and the(C), and
                                    levelsofofactive
                                thelevels      activecaspase-3
                                                      caspase-3 (D)(D)
                                                                     in in rats
                                                                        rats withwith   chronic
                                                                                    chronic        colitis
                                                                                               colitis     induced
                                                                                                       induced          by DSS.
                                                                                                                  by DSS.         Significance
                                                                                                                            Significance         levels are
                                                                                                                                          levels are
                                indicated  byby
                                   indicated    pairwise
                                                  pairwisecomparisons.
                                                           comparisons. *, *, pp<<0.05;
                                                                                   0.05;***,
                                                                                          ***,p < < 0.001;
                                                                                                p 0.001;       p < p0.0001;
                                                                                                            ****,
                                                                                                         ****,        < 0.0001;  ns, non-significant.
                                                                                                                            ns, non-significant.

                                   2.9. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on the mRNA Expression of ASC
                                2.9.and
                                     TheNLRP3
                                         Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on the mRNA Expression of ASC and
                                NLRP3
                                        ASC acts as a linker protein, aiding in the assembly and activation of the inflammasome
                                     ASC acts
                                   complex.   Theas a    linker
                                                   protein’s    protein, contains
                                                             N-terminus    aiding ain the
                                                                                     caspaseassembly     anddomain
                                                                                               recruitment      activation  of the
                                                                                                                      (CARD),   whichinflam-
                                masome      complex.
                                   recruits and   binds The   protein’s
                                                        caspase-1  to the N-terminus
                                                                         inflammasomecontains
                                                                                          complex, a     caspaseitsrecruitment
                                                                                                      facilitating                  domain
                                                                                                                      activation. This
                                (CARD),    whichto the
                                   process leads         cleavage
                                                    recruits and of  pro-IL-1β
                                                                  binds        and to
                                                                          caspase-1 pro-IL-18
                                                                                        the into their
                                                                                              inflammasomeactive forms.  Additionally,
                                                                                                                  complex,   facilitating its
                                   ASC   comprises    a pyrin  domain,   which  interacts  with   the  NLRP3     sensor
                                activation. This process leads to the cleavage of pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18 into their    protein.   Theactive
                                   activation   of the  NLRP3   inflammasome     occurs  in  two   steps.  First, the
                                forms. Additionally, ASC comprises a pyrin domain, which interacts with the NLRP3 sen-inflammasome
                                   undergoes priming through the activation of NFκB, which results in the upregulation of
                                sor protein. The activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome occurs in two steps. First, the
                                   inflammasome components such as NLRP3. The second step involves the activation of
                                   NLRP3 by specific danger signals. This process leads to the assembly of the inflammasome
                                   complex and subsequent activation of caspase-1. Chronic colitis can be triggered by
                                   various factors that activate the NLRP3 inflammasome. These factors include the release
                                   of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) by damaged epithelial cells and the
                                   dysbiosis of the gut microbiome. The activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome results in an
                                   increased secretion of IL-1β and IL-18, promoting inflammation, epithelial damage, and
                                   the infiltration of immune cells into the colonic mucosa. This exacerbates the inflammation
                                   in chronic colitis. Our study found that in rats with chronic colitis, the mRNA expression
                                   of ASC (Figure 9A) and NLRP3 (Figure 9B) was significantly higher than in normal rats.
                                   However, ingestion of KE significantly reduced the mRNA expression of NLRP3, while
                                   ASC mRNA expression remained unchanged in the CC/KE group compared with the CC
                                   group. Additionally, there was no significant change in the mRNA expression of ASC and
                                   NLRP3 in the CC/F rat group compared with normal rats. These findings suggest that KE
                                   may have a therapeutic effect on chronic colitis by modulating the expression of NLRP3, a
                                   crucial component of the inflammasome complex.
                                than in normal rats. However, ingestion of KE significantly reduced the mRNA expre
                                of NLRP3, while ASC mRNA expression remained unchanged in the CC/KE group
                                pared with the CC group. Additionally, there was no significant change in the m
                                expression of ASC and NLRP3 in the CC/F rat group compared with normal rats. T
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953   findings suggest that KE may have a therapeutic eﬀect on chronic colitis     by
                                                                                                         12 of 28 modul

                                the expression of NLRP3, a crucial component of the inflammasome complex.




                                Figure  9.9.The
                                   Figure    Theimpact   ofKE
                                                 impact of   KEingestion andand
                                                                 ingestion        intermittent
                                                                             intermittent         fasting
                                                                                          fasting on         on of
                                                                                                      the levels thethe
                                                                                                                     levels
                                                                                                                        mRNA  of the  mRNA expre
                                                                                                                                 expression
                                   of apoptosis-associated  speck-like protein containing  a CARD     (ASC)   (A) and  nucleotide-binding
                                of apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC) (A) and nucleotide-bi
                                oligomerization    domain-like receptor
                                   oligomerization domain-like            protein
                                                                    receptor      3 (NLRP3)
                                                                              protein         (B) in rats
                                                                                        3 (NLRP3)      (B)with  chronic
                                                                                                            in rats     colitis
                                                                                                                     with       induced
                                                                                                                             chronic      by induc
                                                                                                                                       colitis
                                   DSS.
                                DSS.    Significance levels
                                      Significance   levelsare indicated
                                                             are         by pairwise
                                                                  indicated           comparisons.
                                                                             by pairwise             ****, p < 0.0001;
                                                                                             comparisons.       ****, pns,< non-significant.
                                                                                                                            0.0001; ns, non-signifi
                                   2.10. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on the Levels of NLRP3 and NGSDMD
                                2.10. The
                                       TheImpact
                                           NLRP3of KE  Ingestionisand
                                                 inflammasome          Intermittent
                                                                   involved in       Fasting
                                                                               activating     on thewhich
                                                                                          caspase-1, Levelsinof NLRP3
                                                                                                             turn cleavesand
                                NGSDMD
                                   GSDMD to generate its active N-terminal fragment known as NGSDMD. This fragment
                                   then oligomerizes to form membrane pores leading to cell swelling, membrane rupture, and
                                      The NLRP3 inflammasome is involved in activating caspase-1, which in turn cle
                                  pyroptotic cell death that allow the release of inflammatory cytokines. Excessive GSDMD
                                GSDMD
                                   cleavageto  generate
                                             has           its toactive
                                                 been linked            N-terminal
                                                                  heightened           fragment
                                                                              pyroptosis, a form ofknown
                                                                                                     programmedas NGSDMD.         This frag
                                                                                                                    cell death, and
                                then   oligomerizes
                                   inflammation   in thetocolonic
                                                           form mucosa.
                                                                    membrane Our pores   leading ato cell
                                                                                  study revealed              swelling,
                                                                                                      significant         membrane
                                                                                                                  increase in  both     rup
                                   NLRP3   (Figure 10A)  and  NGSDMD      (Figure 10B) levels in the CC  group
                                and pyroptotic cell death that allow the release of inflammatory cytokines. Excecompared   with  the
                                   N group. However, the CC/KE group exhibited a significant reduction in these levels due
                                   to the consumption of KE compared with the CC group. Notably, intermittent fasting had
                                   no significant effect on these levels.
                                GSDMD cleavage has been linked to heightened pyroptosis, a form of programmed cell
                                death, and inflammation in the colonic mucosa. Our study revealed a significant increase
                                in both NLRP3 (Figure 10A) and NGSDMD (Figure 10B) levels in the CC group compared
                                with the N group. However, the CC/KE group exhibited a significant reduction in these
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                     13 of 28
                                levels due to the consumption of KE compared with the CC group. Notably, intermittent
                                fasting had no significant eﬀect on these levels.




                                Figure 10. The impact of KE ingestion and intermittent fasting on the levels of nucleotide-binding
                                oligomerization domain-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) (A) and gasdermin D N-terminal fragment
                                (NGSDMD) (B)
                                (NGSDMD)     (B)in
                                                 inrats
                                                     ratswith
                                                           withchronic
                                                                 chronic colitis induced
                                                                           colitis  induced by DSS.  Significance
                                                                                               by DSS.            levels
                                                                                                         Significance    are indicated
                                                                                                                      levels           by pair-
                                                                                                                              are indicated by
                                wise comparisons.   . *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01;  ****, p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant.
                                pairwise comparisons. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ****, p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant.

                                2.11. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on the Macroautophagy Markers
                                      The activation of macroautophagy in colitis is thought to be an adaptive response to
                                help limit inflammation and tissue injury, indicating it plays a protective role. stimulating
                                macroautophagy may have       have the potential
                                                                          potential as a treatment strategy. BECN1 is an important
                                          involved in
                                protein involved       in the
                                                           the activation
                                                                activationofofmacroautophagy.
                                                                                  macroautophagy.ItItforms  formsa a    protein
                                                                                                                     protein       complex
                                                                                                                                complex         that
                                                                                                                                             that  is
                                is required
                                required   forfor
                                               thethe   initiation
                                                    initiation    of of   macroautophagy
                                                                     macroautophagy        by by   recruiting
                                                                                               recruiting   other other  proteins
                                                                                                                    proteins        formform
                                                                                                                                to to            the
                                                                                                                                            the iso-
                                isolation
                                lation      membrane
                                        membrane       thatthat   engulfs
                                                             engulfs          cellular
                                                                        cellular       components
                                                                                  components      for for     degradation.
                                                                                                       degradation.      BECN1    BECN1       levels
                                                                                                                                     levels corre-
                                correlate  with  the  activation    of  macroautophagy.      Higher    levels  of  BECN1
                                late with the activation of macroautophagy. Higher levels of BECN1 generally indicate        generally     indicate
                                more induction
                                more   induction of of the
                                                        the macroautophagy
                                                             macroautophagy process.process. OnOn the
                                                                                                    the other
                                                                                                         other hand,
                                                                                                                 hand, P62
                                                                                                                         P62 isis aa protein
                                                                                                                                      protein that
                                                                                                                                                that
                                undergoes    selective   degradation       through  macroautophagy.        Thus,
                                undergoes selective degradation through macroautophagy. Thus, its levels show      its levels  show     an inverse
                                                                                                                                             an in-
                                correlation
                                verse         with macroautophagy
                                       correlation    with macroautophagy     activation.   P62 binds
                                                                                    activation.           to proteins
                                                                                                  P62 binds               and organelles
                                                                                                                 to proteins     and organelles that
                                macroautophagy
                                that  macroautophagy  targets   for for
                                                             targets degradation.    It interacts
                                                                            degradation.           with with
                                                                                            It interacts  proteins on     the on the
                                                                                                                   proteins   autophagosome
                                                                                                                                          autopha-
                                membrane      to  facilitate   degradation.       Once   engulfed    by  the   autophagosome,
                                gosome membrane to facilitate degradation. Once engulfed by the autophagosome, lyso-                    lysosomal
                                enzymes
                                somal      break down
                                        enzymes     breakp62 downand p62
                                                                       the molecules   it binds. Inducing
                                                                             and the molecules      it binds.macroautophagy
                                                                                                                Inducing macroautophagyleads to the
                                degradation    of  more    p62  and   its targets, resulting  in lower   p62   levels  in
                                leads to the degradation of more p62 and its targets, resulting in lower p62 levels in thethe  cell.   Conversely,
                                impaired
                                cell.       macroautophagy
                                      Conversely,                   cannot effectivelycannot
                                                     impaired macroautophagy               degrade    p62, leading
                                                                                                  eﬀectively           to itsp62,
                                                                                                                 degrade      accumulation
                                                                                                                                    leading to itsin
                                the cell. In our  study,    we  detected    impaired   macroautophagy        in the
                                accumulation in the cell. In our study, we detected impaired macroautophagy in the CCCC   rat group      compared
                                with normal rats. However, we observed macroautophagy activation in the CC/F group
                                compared with the CC group (BECN1, p < 0.02; p62, p < 0.0001), as well as in the CC/KE
                                group compared with the CC group (BECN1, p < 0.0001; p62, p < 0.0001). These findings
                                (as shown in Figure 11A for BECN1 and Figure 11B for p62) suggest that both intermittent
                                fasting and KE consumption induced macroautophagy activation, with KE consumption
                                demonstrating a particularly strong effect.
                                                         rat group compared with normal rats. However, we observed macroautophagy activation
                                                         in the CC/F group compared with the CC group (BECN1, p < 0.02; p62, p < 0.0001), as well
                                                         as in the CC/KE group compared with the CC group (BECN1, p < 0.0001; p62, p < 0.0001).
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                            These findings (as shown in Figure 11A for BECN1 and Figure 11B for p62) suggest    that
                                                                                                                                       14 of 28
                                                         both intermittent fasting and KE consumption induced macroautophagy activation, with
                                                         KE consumption demonstrating a particularly strong eﬀect.
                       Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                          14 of 29




                                                         rat group compared with normal rats. However, we observed macroautophagy activation
                                                         in the CC/F group compared with the CC group (BECN1, p < 0.02; p62, p < 0.0001), as well
                                                         as in the CC/KE group compared with the CC group (BECN1, p < 0.0001; p62, p < 0.0001).
                                                         These findings (as shown in Figure 11A for BECN1 and Figure 11B for p62) suggest that
                                                         both intermittent fasting and KE consumption induced macroautophagy activation, with
                                                         KE consumption demonstrating a particularly strong eﬀect.




                                                     impact
                                     Figure 11. The Figure  11.of
                                                                TheKE  ingestion
                                                                    impact of  KE and     intermittent
                                                                                  ingestion and             fasting
                                                                                                  intermittent         on
                                                                                                                 fasting   Beclin-1(BECN1)
                                                                                                                         on Beclin-1  (BECN1)       (A) and
                                                                                                                                                (A) and seques-
                                                     (p62) (B)(p62)
                                     sequestosome-1 tosome-1         (B) inwith
                                                                 in rats    rats with chronic
                                                                                 chronic       colitisinduced
                                                                                            colitis    induced by byDSS.
                                                                                                                      DSS.Significance                are in-by
                                                                                                                                               are indicated
                                                                                                                                       levelslevels
                                                                                                                             Significance
                                                     pairwise comparisons. *, p < 0.05; ***, p < 0.001; ****, p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant.
                                     dicated by pairwise comparisons. *, p < 0.05; ***, p < 0.001; ****, p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant.

                                     2.12. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on Tight Junction Proteins
                                          Maintaining the integrity and barrier function of the intestinal epithelium is a critical
                                     function of tight junction proteins. However, chronic colitis can disrupt these proteins,
                                     leading to increased intestinal permeability, bacterial translocation, and the release of in-
                                     flammatory cytokines. In our study, we administered DSS to rats in the CC group, which
                                     resulted in a significant decrease in the levels of tight junction proteins ZO-1 (Figure 12A),
                                                      Figureand
                                     OCLN (Figure 12B),           CLDN5
                                                             11. The        (Figure
                                                                     impact of        12C) and
                                                                                 KE ingestioncompared       withfasting
                                                                                                   intermittent           baseline
                                                                                                                   their on  Beclin-1levels.  Interest-
                                                                                                                                      (BECN1) (A)    and seques-
                                                      tosome-1 (p62)
                                     ingly, KE consumption,           (B)than
                                                                 rather   in ratsintermittent
                                                                                  with chronic colitis induced
                                                                                                fasting,          by DSS.
                                                                                                            resulted       Significance levels
                                                                                                                        in significant          are indicated
                                                                                                                                         increases    in      by
                                                      pairwise comparisons. *, p < 0.05; ***, p < 0.001; ****, p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant.
                                     the levels of these proteins compared with the DSS-treated CC rat group.




                                     Figure 12. The impact of KE ingestion and intermittent fasting on tight junction proteins zonula
                                     occludens-1 (ZO-1) (A), occludin (OCLN) (B), and claudin-5 (CLDN5) (C) in rats with chronic colitis
                                     induced by DSS. Significance levels are indicated by pairwise comparisons. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01;
                                     ***, p < 0.001; ****, p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant.
     Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                                  15 of 28




                                       2.13. Correlation Analysis of the Measured Parameters
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                               15 of 29
                                              As shown in Figure 13, our research findings demonstrate a positive correlation be-
                                        tween the levels of β-hydroxybutyrate in rats with chronic colitis and the tight junction
                                        proteins OCLN and CLDN5, with a strong tendency towards a positive correlation with
                                        ZO-1.12.This
                                     Figure       Thesuggests
                                                      impact of that
                                                                  KEincreasing
                                                                       ingestion the
                                                                                  andlevels  of β-hydroxybutyrate
                                                                                       intermittent fasting on tightcould  be beneficial
                                                                                                                     junction proteins zonula
                                        in reducing   gut  permeability.   In addition,  β-hydroxybutyrate    may   help manage
                                     occludens-1 (ZO-1) (A), occludin (OCLN) (B), and claudin-5 (CLDN5) (C) in rats with chronic   colitis colitis
                                     induced by DSS. Significance levels are indicated by pairwise comparisons. *, p < 0.05;mech-
                                        symptoms     by stabilizing  or upregulating   these key  barrier proteins. This potential  **, p < 0.01;
                                     ***,anism  may****,
                                          p < 0.001; explain  the beneficial
                                                         p < 0.0001;          effects of ketogenic diets or ketone supplementation in
                                                                      ns, non-significant.
                                        managing colitis and other forms of intestinal inflammation.




                                       Figure
                                     Figure 13.13. Correlation
                                                Correlation    analysis
                                                            analysis of of
                                                                        thethe measured
                                                                            measured  parameters inin
                                                                                        parameters    rats
                                                                                                    rats   with
                                                                                                         with   chronic
                                                                                                              chronic   colitis
                                                                                                                      colitis   induced
                                                                                                                              induced by DSS.
                                       by DSS.

                                            In addition, our study revealed a negative correlation between the levels of
                                       β-hydroxybutyrate in rats with chronic colitis and proinflammatory cytokines such as
                                       TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β, and IL-18, with a strong tendency towards a positive correlation with
                                       IL-10 levels. This suggests that β-hydroxybutyrate may have anti-inflammatory effects in
                                       chronic colitis by reducing the production of proinflammatory cytokines and mitigating
                                       the inflammatory response. Additionally, β-hydroxybutyrate may increase the levels of the
                                       anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 to suppress inflammation and facilitate intestinal healing.
                                            Furthermore, our investigation revealed a negative correlation between the levels of
                                       β-hydroxybutyrate in rats with chronic colitis and several inflammatory markers, includ-
                                       ing MPO activity, ROS production, NLRP3 levels, caspase-1 activity, NFκB DNA binding
                                       activity, and the NGSDMD. However, we did not find a significant correlation with ac-
                                       tive caspase-3 levels. These findings suggest that β-hydroxybutyrate may help mitigate
                                       gut inflammation in chronic colitis by inhibiting inflammasome activation and oxidative
                                       stress through various mechanisms. Specifically, MPO activity and ROS production were
                                       negatively correlated with β-hydroxybutyrate levels, implying that β-hydroxybutyrate
                                       may reduce oxidative stress, which is often increased in colitis and contributes to gut
                                       inflammation. Moreover, NLRP3 levels, caspase-1 activity, and NFκB DNA binding activity
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                          16 of 28




                                were all negatively correlated with β-hydroxybutyrate levels. These components play a
                                role in the NLRP3 inflammasome activation, which drives intestinal inflammation in colitis
                                by consequent production of IL-1β and IL-18. Thus, the negative correlations suggest that
                                β-hydroxybutyrate may suppress NLRP3 inflammasome activation. In addition, NGSDMD
                                levels were also negatively correlated with β-hydroxybutyrate. NGSDMD release is associ-
                                ated with pyroptosis, a proinflammatory form of programmed cell death. Therefore, lower
                                levels of NGSDMD with higher β-hydroxybutyrate suggest that β-hydroxybutyrate may
                                inhibit pyroptosis. However, our results did not show a significant correlation between
                                caspase-3 activity and β-hydroxybutyrate levels. This indicates that β-hydroxybutyrate’s
                                effects may be specific to inflammasome-related pathways rather than overall apoptosis.
                                      Finally, we revealed a negative correlation between levels of β-hydroxybutyrate and
                                p62, while there is a positive correlation with BECN1. This suggests that β-hydroxybutyrate
                                may have a modulating effect on autophagy in chronic colitis. The negative correlation
                                between β-hydroxybutyrate and p62 indicates that higher levels of β-hydroxybutyrate are
                                associated with lower levels of p62 protein, which is a marker of autophagic flux. Increased
                                levels of p62 typically indicate impaired autophagy, so the lower p62 levels observed with
                                higher β-hydroxybutyrate suggest that β-hydroxybutyrate may enhance autophagy. The
                                positive correlation between β-hydroxybutyrate and BECN1 further supports this idea,
                                as BECN1 is important for initiating autophagy and higher levels of BECN1 promote
                                autophagy. Therefore, the positive correlation between β-hydroxybutyrate and BECN1
                                suggests that β-hydroxybutyrate may stimulate autophagy by upregulating BECN1. Au-
                                tophagy helps remove damaged organelles and aggregates to maintain cellular homeostasis,
                                and its impairment has been linked to chronic inflammation, including colitis. By potentially
                                enhancing autophagy through reducing p62 and increasing BECN1, β-hydroxybutyrate
                                may help resolve gut inflammation in colitis. Although the correlations provide insight
                                into potential mechanisms, the observational nature of the correlation means that causation
                                cannot be definitively established.

                                2.14. The Impact of KE Ingestion and Intermittent Fasting on Microbiome Composition
                                     Chronic colitis is associated with elevated levels of Fusobacterium species, which may
                                contribute to inflammation by invading intestinal cells, activating the NLRP3 inflamma-
                                some, and dysregulating the microbiome. Additionally, increased levels of Bacteroides
                                have been implicated in some inflammatory bowel diseases such as chronic colitis. The
                                overgrowth of certain Clostridium species may also trigger and sustain chronic inflamma-
                                tion in colitis by affecting the intestinal environment and immune system. On the other
                                hand, Bifidobacteria are a beneficial bacteria genus that constitutes a significant proportion
                                of the gut microbiota, particularly in the colon. Reduction in Bifidobacteria is linked to
                                increased disease severity and poorer outcomes in colitis. Lactobacillus bacteria are gen-
                                erally considered probiotics that may have potential health benefits. However, patients
                                with ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease often exhibit lower levels of Lactobacillus than
                                healthy individuals. This observation suggests that lower abundances of Lactobacillus may
                                be associated with dysbiosis and chronic inflammation in the gut. In our study, we revealed
                                a significant disruption in the gut composition of the abovementioned bacteria species in
                                the CC rat group. While both intermittent fasting and KE ingestion caused a significant
                                reversal in the relative abundance of these bacteria species compared with the CC group
                                (except for KE in the case of Bacteroides), neither regimen could fully restore the normal
                                relative abundance of these bacteria, except for Lactobacillus, as depicted in Figure 14A
                                (Fusobacterium), B (Bacteroides), C (Clostridium), D (Bifidobacteria), and E (Lactobacillus).
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                      16 of 29
 Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                                                     17 of 28




                                   Figure 14. The impact of KE ingestion and intermittent fasting on microbiome composition in rats
                                  Figure 14. The impact of KE ingestion and intermittent fasting on microbiome composition in rats
                                   with chronic colitis induced by DSS: This figure depicts the changes in the microbiome composition of
                                  with chronic colitis induced by DSS: This figure depicts the changes in the microbiome composition
                                   five bacterial species, Fusobacterium spp. (A), Bacteroids spp. (B), Clostridium spp. (C), Bifidobacterium
                                  of five bacterial species, Fusobacterium spp. (A), Bacteroids spp. (B), Clostridium spp. (C), Bifidobacte-
                                   spp.spp.
                                  rium    (D),(D),
                                                andand  Lactobacillus
                                                            Lactobacillus spp.
                                                                             spp.(E),
                                                                                   (E),ininresponse
                                                                                            responsetotoKEKEingestion
                                                                                                               ingestion and
                                                                                                                          and intermittent     fasting. The
                                                                                                                                intermittent fasting.    The
                                  significance    levels are
                                   significance levels       are indicated
                                                                   indicatedbyby pairwise
                                                                                     pairwisecomparisons,
                                                                                                 comparisons,and the
                                                                                                                  and the      suggest
                                                                                                                      resultsresults    significant
                                                                                                                                      suggest       changes
                                                                                                                                                significant
                                   associated
                                  changes       with
                                            associated  β-hydroxybutyrate
                                                            with                  boosting on
                                                                    β-hydroxybutyrate                microbiome
                                                                                                 the on
                                                                                             boosting              composition of
                                                                                                           the microbiome            these of
                                                                                                                               composition bacterial species.
                                                                                                                                                 these bac-
                                   *, p < 0.05;
                                  terial        **,*,p p< <0.01;
                                         species.                   **,pp<<0.001;
                                                             0.05;***,             ****,pp<<0.001;
                                                                            0.01; ***,        0.0001; ns,p < 0.0001;
                                                                                                   ****,  non-significant.
                                                                                                                     ns, non-significant.
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                            18 of 28




                                3. Discussion
                                      Ulcerative colitis is a chronic and incurable form of IBDs that can significantly impair
                                quality of life and increase the risk of colitis-associated cancer and mortality. One major
                                challenge associated with ulcerative colitis is the limited treatment options available, which
                                often come with non-tolerable adverse effects.
                                      In this study, we aimed to shed light on the potential therapeutic value of keto-
                                sis/ketone production in managing IBD. Specifically, we investigated the benefits of ketone-
                                based medications or supplements that can increase ketone levels without requiring a
                                restrictive diet. This approach has the potential to improve compliance and safety in the
                                treatment of chronic colitis. To examine this novel treatment method, we investigated
                                the effects of two regimens that increase β-hydroxybutyrate levels: intermittent fasting
                                and the consumption of a specific type of KE called (R,R)-BD-AcAc2. We evaluated their
                                effectiveness in managing chronic colitis induced by DSS in rats.
                                      In accordance with our protocol, rats were administered the KE, resulting in elevated
                                levels of β-hydroxybutyrate, indicating a state resembling nutritional ketosis. Additionally,
                                16 h of intermittent fasting led to increased levels of β-hydroxybutyrate, suggesting the
                                onset of early ketosis. Interestingly, despite exhibiting modulation of autophagy and correc-
                                tion of dysbiosis, rats subjected to 24 days of intermittent fasting did not show significant
                                coloprotective effects against chronic DSS administration. In contrast, the consumption of
                                KE demonstrated a notable coloprotective property, primarily by modulating the NLRP3
                                inflammasome and its downstream inflammatory pyroptotic cell death. These results indi-
                                cate that achieving a state of nutritional ketosis, as opposed to early ketosis, is necessary to
                                confer a coloprotective effect.
                                      It is noteworthy that both protocols demonstrated almost the same impact on the
                                relative abundance of the tested bacteria. This suggests that the correction of dysbiosis is
                                not the primary mechanism through which β-hydroxybutyrate alleviates colitis. Although
                                the intermittent fasting protocol induced only a small increase in autophagy, it seems
                                that this minor change has a negligible effect on colon inflammation. On the other hand,
                                KE consumption was more effective than the intermittent fasting protocol as it exhibited
                                stronger autophagy-inducing capabilities in addition to demonstrating the inactivation of
                                the NLRP3 inflammasome.
                                      In addition to improving disease activity, the consumption of KE resulted in the
                                improvement of colonic macroscopic and microscopic features, as well as a decrease in
                                inflammation scores. Furthermore, KE counteracted the DSS-induced decrease in the
                                percentage of weight change upon experiment completion, reduced the colonic weight-to-
                                length ratio, and increased the survival rate of DSS-insulted rats. Although oxidative stress
                                parameters were not normalized, KE ingestion showed potential antioxidant activities.
                                Along with improving gut microbiome composition, KE consumption improved the levels
                                of tight junction proteins, which protect against leaky gut. Moreover, KE consumption
                                exhibited anti-inflammatory properties by reducing proinflammatory cytokine production.
                                      It is worth noting that our results revealed an increase in the levels of IL-10 and
                                IL-4 in non-treated chronic colitis rats. This result suggests that the body mounts an
                                immunoregulatory response involving IL-10 and IL-4 against chronic colitis, but this
                                response is inadequate to resolve the inflammation. Additionally, this result indicated a shift
                                towards a Th2-mediated immune response, confirming the chronic nature of our model.
                                      The transcriptional regulation of IL-1β and IL-18 is mediated by NFκB, which acts as
                                the priming signal for the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. The assembly of the
                                inflammasome complex and subsequent activation of caspase-1 leads to the bioactivation
                                of IL-1β and IL-18, making them key players in the pyroptosis process. The coloprotective
                                effect of KE can be attributed to its ability to inhibit both the priming and activation signals
                                of the NLRP3 inflammasome, thus preventing highly inflammatory pyroptotic cell death.
                                Importantly, KE consumption was found to decrease NFκB DNA binding and downregulate
                                NLRP3, which is also transcriptionally regulated by NFκB. This results in a reduction in
                                caspase-1 activity, ultimately leading to the inhibition of IL-1β and IL-18 bioactivation. This
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                            19 of 28




                                was further confirmed by a reduction in the gasdermin D N-terminal fragment, which is
                                indicative of curbed pyroptosis. During pyroptosis, inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β
                                and IL-18 are released from the dying cell, which can stimulate the production of ROS
                                and recruit immune cells such as neutrophils that release MPO during inflammation. The
                                decrease in MPO activity observed after KE consumption can, therefore, be explained by
                                the inhibited release of IL-1β and IL-18, which in turn reduces the production of ROS and
                                the recruitment of immune cells.
                                      Furthermore, the administration of KE has been shown to significantly repress active
                                caspase-3, confirming its antiapoptotic effects. Specifically, oxidative stress resulting from
                                excessive ROS production in the damaged colon can overwhelm the cell’s antioxidant
                                defenses, leading to DNA damage and mitochondrial dysfunction that trigger apoptosis.
                                The release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria activates caspases and triggers the
                                apoptotic pathway. Therefore, KE’s anti-apoptotic function may be attributed, at least in
                                part, to its ability to improve the antioxidant defense machinery in the cell.
                                      Our study shows that increased levels of β-hydroxybutyrate in rats with chronic
                                colitis are positively correlated with tight junction proteins OCLN and CLDN5, with a
                                strong tendency towards a positive correlation with ZO-1, indicating that increasing β-
                                hydroxybutyrate levels could be beneficial in reducing gut permeability. Therefore, β-
                                hydroxybutyrate may help manage colitis symptoms by stabilizing or upregulating these
                                key barrier proteins, which may explain the beneficial effects of ketogenic diets or ketone
                                supplementation in managing colitis and other forms of intestinal inflammation. Our
                                analysis also revealed that β-hydroxybutyrate is negatively correlated with the measured
                                proinflammatory cytokines in our study. Indicating that β-hydroxybutyrate may have
                                anti-inflammatory effects in chronic colitis by reducing the production of proinflamma-
                                tory cytokines and mitigating the inflammatory response. Furthermore, we found that
                                β-hydroxybutyrate may help mitigate gut inflammation in chronic colitis by inhibiting
                                NFκB and NLRP3 inflammasome activation and restraining oxidative stress as revealed also
                                by correlation analysis. β-hydroxybutyrate may also enhance autophagy as revealed by re-
                                duced p62 and increased BECN1, which may help resolve gut inflammation in colitis. Finally,
                                β-hydroxybutyrate may have a positive impact on maintaining a healthy microbiome.
                                      In conclusion, this preclinical study indicates a potential therapeutic benefit of ketosis
                                and ketone production in the management of various inflammatory diseases, particularly
                                in the context of IBDs.
                                      Our encouraging results provide a strong rationale for conducting further clinical
                                research to explore the efficacy of β-hydroxybutyrate boosting compounds such as KEs in
                                treating these conditions. If successful, these novel treatment approaches could significantly
                                improve the lives of patients suffering from inflammatory diseases with the greatest safety.
                                However, our study has limitations, including the use of an animal model that may not
                                fully capture the intricate complexities of human pathophysiology, potentially limiting
                                generalizability. The specific experimental conditions and the focus on short-term outcomes
                                also restrict the applicability and understanding of the long-term effects of (R,R)-BD-AcAc2.
                                Additionally, despite rigorous methodologies and blinded assessments, uncontrolled con-
                                founding variables should be considered. Therefore, more investment in clinical research
                                is needed to fully realize the therapeutic potential of (R,R)-BD-AcAc2 and other KEs or
                                ketone salts.

                                4. Materials and Methods
                                4.1. Drugs and Chemicals
                                     (R)-3-Hydroxybutyl (R)-3-hydroxybutyrate ketone ester known as (R,R)-BD-AcAc2
                                with the formula C8 H16 O4 was obtained from MCE (Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA). Dex-
                                tran sodium sulfate was supplied by Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA; Mw = ~40,000).
                                Fine chemicals and reagents were supplied by Sigma-Aldrich unless indicated else.
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                                       20 of 28




                                4.2. Animals
                                     We obtained male Sprague Dawley (SD) rats from TBRI, aged seven weeks and
                                weighing 180–200 g. The rats were given a two-week period to acclimate to the laboratory
                                before the commencement of the experiment. They were kept in controlled environmental
                                conditions since birth, with a temperature of 22 ± 2 ◦ C, a relative humidity of 50 ± 10%,
                                and a 12 h light/dark cycle (lights on from 09:00 a.m. to 09:00 p.m.). The rats were
                                provided with ad libitum feeding and drinking. The protocol was approved by the IACUC
                                at FPDU under FPDU24120,2. All animals were treated and sacrificed according to the
                                corresponding guidelines.

                                4.3. Induction of Chronic Colitis in Rats
                                      According to the procedure outlined by Hoffmann, et al. [32], chronic colitis was
                                induced in the experimental animals by administering 2% DSS for seven days, followed
                                by 1% DSS for ten days, and finally, another seven days of 2% DSS treatment. Throughout
                                the experiment, the animals were monitored daily for changes in body weight, and the
                                percentage of body weight loss was determined relative to their initial body weight on the
                                first day of the study.

                                4.4. Experimental Design
                                      Table 1 shows that the rats were randomly divided into six groups. The N group
                                (n = 8) served as the control group. The N/F group (n = 8) consisted of rats that were
                                subjected to 16 h of fasting including the dark cycle (from 05:00 p.m. to 09:00 a.m.) while
                                being fed standard rodent food ad libitum at other times. The N/KE group (n = 8) consisted
                                of rats that were given a mixture of KE and standard rodent food ad libitum. The CC group
                                (n = 20) consisted of rats that received DSS. The CC/F group (n = 15) consisted of rats that
                                received DSS and were subjected to the intermittent fasting protocol. The CC/KE group
                                (n = 15) consisted of rats that received DSS and the KE/standard food mixture. On the
                                start of day 25 at 09:00 a.m., all animals were sacrificed while under anesthesia (thiopental
                                sodium 40 mg/kg).

                                Table 1. Experimental design.

       Exp. Groups                Days 1–7                      Days 8–17                      Days 18–24         Day 25
      N group (n = 8)           Non-fasting                    Non-fasting                    Non-fasting
        N/F (n = 8)             Fasting—16 h                  Fasting—16 h                   Fasting—16 h
                                Non-fasting                    Non-fasting                    Non-fasting
       N/KE (n = 8)


                                                                                                                    Sacrifice day
                                   KE                             KE                             KE
                                Non-fasting                    Non-fasting                    Non-fasting
        CC (n = 20)
                                 2% DSS                         1% DSS                         2% DSS
                                Fasting—16 h                  Fasting—16 h                   Fasting—16 h
       CC/F (n = 15)
                                   2% DSS                        1% DSS                         2% DSS
                                Non-fasting                    Non-fasting                    Non-fasting
      CC/KE (n = 15)             2% DSS                         1% DSS                         2% DSS
                                   KE                             KE                             KE
                                CC, chronic colitis; DSS, dextran sodium sulfate; F, fasting; KE, ketone ester.


                                     In this experiment, blood samples were collected from all animal groups to determine
                                β-hydroxybutyrate levels after 8 h of the fasting period, which begins at 5:00 p.m. on day
                                24. This occurred before the end of the day at 1:00 a.m. The animal groups were then
                                allowed free access to food to prevent discrepancies in disease activity and body weight
                                changes on the final day of the experiment. One hour after the end of the fasting period (at
                                10:00 a.m.), disease activity and body weight changes were assessed in all animal groups,
                                followed by animal sacrifice and tissue sample collection. Throughout the experiment,
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                          21 of 28




                                body weight changes were monitored in all animal groups one hour after breakfast (at
                                10:00 a.m.) on previous days. It is worth noting that our preliminary trials revealed levels
                                of β-hydroxybutyrate.

                                4.5. Rational of KE Dosing and Fasting Protocol
                                      The normal control group of rats was given free access to standard rodent food (FPDU
                                rodent food). In contrast, the groups receiving the KE were given (R,R)-BD-AcAc2 mixed
                                with their standard rodent food ad libitum. Our pilot experiment showed that a 200 g
                                SD rat in our lab typically consumes an amount of food equivalent to 7.5% of its body
                                weight. Therefore, the rats in the KE group were given standard rodent food mixed with
                                4% (R,R)-BD-AcAc2 and 1% saccharin for palatability, as previously described [33], This
                                mixture helped prevent food aversion in the rats. After conducting a preliminary trial, it
                                was determined that the combination of KE and food resulted in increased plasma levels of
                                β-hydroxybutyrate to >3 mmol/L after one week of continuous feeding. The amount of
                                KE used in this experiment was then calculated accordingly. A plasma β-hydroxybutyrate
                                level of >3 mmol/L indicates that the body is in a state of ketosis, this can occur in several
                                situations, including during prolonged fasting and low-carbohydrate diets (such as the
                                ketogenic diet). All animal groups received standard rodent food containing 1% saccharin.
                                It is worth noting that our initial trials showed that the levels of β-hydroxybutyrate,
                                measured at the end of the fasting period in both the fasting rat groups (N/F and CC/F),
                                did not exceed 1 mmol/L. Moreover, there was no significant difference between these
                                levels and those measured 8 h after the start of the fasting period. These findings indicate
                                that a state of early ketosis was maintained until the end of the fasting period.

                                4.6. Assessment of the Weight/Length Colonic Ratio
                                     To effectively evaluate the severity of colitis progression, one commonly used method
                                is to calculate the weight/length colonic ratio. This approach involves measuring the
                                entire colon that has been well-evacuated of feces and calculating the ratio of its weight to
                                length. The resulting colon weight/length ratio is expressed in grams per centimeter of
                                colonic tissue.

                                4.7. Assessment of the Disease Activity Score (DAI)
                                     The Disease Activity Index (DAI) is an important tool used to evaluate the severity
                                of colitis in preclinical studies. It provides a quantitative assessment of clinical signs
                                associated with colitis, including alterations in body weight, consistency of stool, and blood
                                in the stool. On the 25th day of the experiment, a blinded gastroenterologist determined
                                the DAI. For each rat, the DAI was calculated as the average score for percentage body
                                weight loss, diarrhea, and bloody stool. The evaluation criteria for body weight changes
                                were: 0 for no weight loss, 1 for 1–5% loss, 2 for 6–10% loss, 3 for 11–15% loss, and 4 for
                                16–20% loss. For diarrhea, the evaluation criteria were: 0 for normal stool, 1 for soft stool,
                                2 for very soft stool, and 3 for watery diarrhea. The criteria for evaluating bloody stool
                                were: 0 for negative hemoccult, 1 for positive hemoccult, 2 for traces of blood, and 3 for
                                gross rectal bleeding.

                                4.8. Assessment of the Macroscopic Damage Index (MDI)
                                     A blinded pathologist experienced in gastroenterology visualized the macroscopic
                                features of colon tissue injury in the longitudinally opened colon segments. The MDI was
                                determined for each rat using the following scoring criteria: a score of zero indicated no
                                damage, a score of one indicated hyperemia without ulcers, a score of two indicated the
                                presence of a linear ulcer without significant inflammation, a score of three indicated a
                                linear ulcer with inflammation at one site, a score of four indicated the presence of two or
                                more sites with inflammation or ulceration, a score of five indicated the presence of two or
                                more major sites of inflammation or ulceration or one site with inflammation or ulceration
                                extending ≥ 1 cm along the length of the colon, and a score of six-ten was assigned if the
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                         22 of 28




                                damage covered ≥ 2 cm along the length of the colon, with the score increasing by one for
                                each additional centimeter of involvement.

                                4.9. Sample Collection and Preparation
                                     After completing the experiment, the colons were weighed after being dissected and
                                measured for length. Blood collected was used to isolate plasma for β-hydroxybutyrate
                                analysis. The fresh colons were cleaned using ice-cold saline and dried using sterile towels.
                                The colons were then partitioned into two parts. The first one, which included specimens
                                from the distal colon, was kept in 4% neutral-buffered formalin to be histopathologically
                                examined. The second part was instantly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 ◦ C for
                                qRT-PCR, ELISA, and colorimetry. Additionally, 300 mg stool samples from the cecum were
                                collected from each rat promptly after dissecting colons. DNA was extracted from the stool
                                samples using the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen Inc., Hilden, Germany) following
                                the guidelines of the manufacturer. The extracted DNA was analyzed for concentration
                                using a NanoDrop instrument (OPTIZEN NanoQ, Mecasys) via spectrophotometry.

                                4.10. Histological Examination
                                      The colon tissues were washed with distilled water and then dehydrated using serial
                                dilutions of alcohol. After that, the sections were washed in xylene and embedded in paraf-
                                fin at 56 ◦ C. Paraffin beeswax tissue blocks were then cut into 4–5-µm thicknesses using a
                                microtome. The specimens were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and stained with hematoxylin
                                and eosin stain. The standard histology procedures were performed blindly by a histologist,
                                and the specimens were examined using a Leica DFC camera. The microscopic criteria of
                                the histological scoring system of inflammation were applied as follows: 0 represented
                                normal colonic tissue, 1 represented inflammation or focal ulceration limited to the mucosa,
                                2 represented focal or extensive ulceration and inflammation limited to the mucosa and
                                submucosa, 3 represented focal or extensive ulceration and inflammation with involvement
                                of the muscularis propria, 4 represented focal ulceration and transmural inflammation with
                                involvement of the serosa, 5 represented extensive ulceration and transmural inflamma-
                                tion with involvement of the serosa, and 6 represented focal or extensive ulceration and
                                transmural inflammation and perforation.

                                4.11. Determination of ROS, Malondialdehyde (MDA), Superoxide Dismutase (SOD), and
                                Reduced Glutathione (GSH)
                                      To investigate the presence of ROS in colon tissues, we followed a previously described
                                methodology [13]. Initially, we homogenized 200 mg of fresh colon samples in ice-cold
                                Tris-HCl buffer (40 mM, pH = 7.4) at a 1:10 w/v ratio. Afterward, we mixed 100 µL of
                                homogenates with 1 mL of Tris-HCl buffer and added 10 µM of 20 ,70 -dichlorofluorescin
                                diacetate (Sigma). The reaction mixtures were incubated at 37 ◦ C for 30 min, followed by
                                measuring fluorescence intensity (FI) using a SpectraFluor Plus Microplate Reader (Tecan,
                                Mainz, Germany) with excitation at 485 nm and emission at 525 nm.
                                      To determine the concentration of MDA in colon tissue homogenate, a reaction was
                                carried out with thiobarbituric acid (TBA) at 95 ◦ C for 30 min under acidic conditions.
                                This reaction produced a thiobarbituric acid reactive product, which was measured colori-
                                metrically at 534 nm to determine the absorbance of the resulting pink product. For this
                                procedure, a kit was utilized which was obtained from Bio-diagnostic (Giza, Egypt), and
                                the analysis was conducted following the instructions provided by the manufacturer.
                                      The SOD assay was performed by following the manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-
                                diagnostic). This assay involved inhibiting the reduction of nitroblue tetrazolium dye
                                mediated by phenazine methosulphate through the enzyme’s activity.
                                      The method employed to determine GSH levels involved the reduction of 5,50 dithiobis
                                (2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB) using GSH to yield a yellow-colored compound. The concen-
                                tration of GSH was determined by measuring the absorbance of the reduced chromogen at
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                           23 of 28




                                405 nm. The absorbance was directly proportional to the GSH concentration. All assays of
                                oxidative stress markers were determined in duplicate.

                                4.12. Determination of Plasma β-Hydroxybutyrate
                                     Plasma samples were centrifuged at 10,000× g for 10 min followed by centrifuging
                                the supernatants at 10,000× g with a 50 KD ultrafiltration tube for 15 min. In this assay
                                (Elabscience, Wuhan, China), β-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase catalyzes the oxidative
                                dehydrogenation of β-hydroxybutyrate. Meanwhile, NAD+ is reduced to NADH which
                                under the action of the hydrogen transmitter, transfers electrons to WST-8 to produce a
                                yellow product. The content of β-hydroxybutyrate can be calculated by measuring the
                                change of absorbance value at 450 nm. The β-hydroxybutyrate assay was determined
                                in duplicate.

                                4.13. Determination of Tumor Necrosis Factor-Alpha (TNF-α), IL-6, IL-1β, IL-18, IL-10, and IL-4
                                Levels in Colon Tissue
                                      The TNF-α and IL-10 levels were determined using ELISA kits purchased from LifeS-
                                panBioSciences, Inc. (Seattle, WA, USA), while the IL-6 and IL-4 levels were assessed by
                                kits from R&D System (Minneapolis, MN, USA). The IL-1β levels were measured by an
                                ELISA kit obtained from BioLegend (San Diego, CA, USA), while the measurement of IL-18
                                was conducted using a kit obtained from eBioscience (Vienna, Austria). All protocols used
                                in the assays strictly adhered to the manufacturer’s instructions. All cytokine assays were
                                determined in duplicate.

                                4.14. Determination of Myeloperoxidase (MPO) Activity, NFκB DNA Binding Activity, Caspase-1
                                Activity, and Active Caspase-3
                                      Myeloperoxidase is predominantly expressed in neutrophil granulocytes and is be-
                                lieved to mirror the level of neutrophil activation and infiltration into tissues. To determine
                                the activity of MPO in the colonic tissue, we used an MPO assay obtained from Sigma-
                                Aldrich. In this assay, hypochlorous acid produced by MPO reacts with taurine to form
                                taurine chloramine, which subsequently reacts with TNB to produce DTNB. The activity of
                                MPO was quantified as the amount of MPO enzyme required to hydrolyze the substrate
                                and generate taurine chloramine that could consume 1.0 µmole of TNB per minute at 25 ◦ C.
                                We conducted the MPO assay in duplicate.
                                      To evaluate the nuclear translocation of the p65 subunit, we utilized an assay kit
                                obtained from Abcam that allowed for the analysis of nuclear extracts. The kit contained
                                a specific double-stranded DNA sequence with the NFκB p65 consensus binding site
                                (50 –GGGACTTTCC–30 ) to selectively bind to active NFκB p65. We then used a primary an-
                                tibody to detect an epitope of NFκB p65, which is only accessible when the protein is active
                                and bound to its target DNA [34]. The NFκB p65 activity was determined in duplicate.
                                      To assess the activity of caspase-1, we employed a caspase-1 colorimetric assay kit
                                obtained from R&D Systems. This involved detecting the chromophore p-nitroanilide
                                (p-NA) following its cleavage from the labeled substrate YVAD-p-NA, and quantifying the
                                resulting p-NA light emission at 405 nm with a microtiter plate reader. Cytosolic extracts
                                were obtained by preparing tissue lysates with chilled lysis buffer and then centrifuging
                                them at 10,000× g. The protein concentration of the cytosolic extracts was determined, and
                                100 mg of protein was diluted in 50 µL of lysis buffer. Then, 50 µL of 2× reaction buffer
                                (containing 10 mM DTT) and 5 µL of YVAD-p-NA substrate were added to each sample,
                                and they were incubated at 37 ◦ C for 1–2 h. Finally, we performed duplicate assays of the
                                samples and read them at 405 nm in a microtiter plate reader.
                                      We measured the levels of active caspase-3 using a kit obtained from MyBioSource
                                Inc. (San Diego, CA, USA). The kit utilized a polyclonal anti-active caspase-3 antibody
                                and an active caspase-3-HRP conjugate, and the color intensity obtained was inversely
                                proportional to the amount of active caspase-3 present in the samples. The competition
                                between the active caspase-3 from the samples and the active caspase-3-HRP conjugate for
                                binding sites on the anti-active caspase-3 antibody was restricted by the limited number of
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                           24 of 28




                                available binding sites. As a result, as more binding sites were occupied by active caspase-3
                                from the sample, fewer binding sites remained available for active caspase-3-HRP conjugate
                                to bind [35]. The determination of active caspase-3 was conducted in duplicate.

                                4.15. qRT-PCR Analysis for the mRNA Expression of Apoptosis-Associated Speck-like Protein
                                Containing a CARD (ASC) and NLRP3
                                      The extraction of total RNA from colonic tissues was performed using a Qiagen kit
                                (Venlo, The Netherlands), following the supplier’s recommendations. RNA quality and
                                purity were evaluated at 260 nm using a NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham,
                                MA, USA). To reverse transcribe RNA, the RevertAid First Strand cDNA synthesis kit was
                                utilized. We conducted qRT-PCR using the StepOne™ Real-Time PCR System (Thermo
                                Fisher Scientific). To determine relative expression, we calculated using the comparative cycle
                                threshold (Ct) (2−∆∆CT ) method, normalized to the GAPDH gene. The PCR primer pairs
                                used are described below: For ASC, F: 50 -CTCTGTATGGCAATGTGCTGAC-30 and R: 50 -
                                GAACAAGTTCTTGCAGGTCAG-30 . For NLRP3, F: 50 -GAGCTGGACCTCAGTGACAATGC-
                                30                   and                   R:                 50 -ACCAATGCGAGATCCTGA
                                CAACAC-30 . For GAPDH, F: 50 -TCAAGAAGGTGGTGAAGCAG-30 R: 50 -AGGTGGAAGAAT
                                GGGAGTTG-30 .

                                4.16. Determination of NLRP3 and NGSDMD
                                     Kits supplied by MyBioSource Inc. (San Diego, CA, USA) were used for the determina-
                                tion of NLRP3 and NGSDMD in colon tissue homogenates according to the manufacturer’s
                                instructions. The NGSDMD ELISA kit utilizes a competitive enzyme immunoassay tech-
                                nique. The assay involves incubating the assay sample and buffer with an NGSDMD-HRP
                                conjugate and an anti-NGSDMD antibody in a pre-coated plate for one hour. Following
                                incubation, the wells are decanted and washed five times before adding a substrate for the
                                HRP enzyme. The enzyme-substrate reaction produces a blue-colored complex, which is
                                stopped by the addition of a stop solution, resulting in a yellow solution. The intensity
                                of the color is measured spectrophotometrically at 450 nm in a microplate reader. The
                                intensity of the color is inversely proportional to the concentration of NGSDMD, as both
                                the NGSDMD from the sample and NGSDMD-HRP conjugate compete for binding sites
                                on the anti-NGSDMD antibody. Since the binding sites are limited, the more NGSDMD
                                from the sample that binds to the antibody, the fewer sites are available for NGSDMD-HRP
                                conjugate to bind. By plotting a standard curve relating the intensity of the color to the
                                concentration of standards, the NGSDMD concentration in each sample can be interpolated.

                                4.17. Determination of Beclin-1 (BECN1) and Sequestosome-1 (p62)
                                   BECN1 and p62 colon tissue levels were determined using ELISA kits supplied by
                                CUSABIO (Wuhan, China) and MyBioSource, respectively. All protocols followed the
                                manufacturer’s instructions.

                                4.18. Determination of Zonula Occludens-1 (ZO-1), Occludin (OCLN), and Claudin-5 (CLDN5)
                                    ZO-1, OCLN, and CLDN5 levels were determined following instructions given
                                by CUSABIO.

                                4.19. Detection of Gut Microbiota Using Conventional PCR
                                      To prepare the DNA samples for thermal cycling, we followed a protocol that involved
                                creating reaction mixtures of 25 µL. The mixtures were prepared by combining 12.5 µL of
                                my Taq red mix (Bioline Co., UK), 1 µL of each primer (10 µM each), 2.5 µL of DNA, and
                                nuclease-free water. The PCR amplification protocol consisted of an initial denaturation
                                step at 94 ◦ C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles at 94 ◦ C for 30 s, annealing at a temperature
                                that was calculated for each primer mix (as indicated in Table 2) for 30 s, extension at
                                72 ◦ C for 45 s, and a final termination step at 72 ◦ C for 3 min. To detect the expected PCR
                                amplicons, we conducted electrophoretic separation on a 1.5% agarose gel and compared
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                                   25 of 28




                                the results with a GeneRuler 100 bp plus DNA ladder (Thermo Scientific, USA). The gels
                                were then stained with ethidium bromide and visualized using a UV transilluminator. For
                                each type of bacteria, specific primer sequences are listed in Table 2.

                                Table 2. Primer sequences for the detection of different species of bacteria.

       Primer Name                                           Primer Sequence                      Ta (◦ C)                 bp
                                   F                 GAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG
            (16S)                                                                                    51                   312
                                   R                  GCTGCCTCCCGTAGGAGT
                                   F                GGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGC
       Fusobacterium                                                                                51.5                  162
                                   R             GGCATTCCTACAAATATCTACGAA
                                   F              AAGGGAGCGTAGATGGATGTTTA
      Bacteroides spp.                                                                               55                   193
                                   R                CGAGCCTCAATGTCAGTTGC
                                   F                 CGGTACCTGACTAAGAAGC
      Clostridium spp.                                                                               50                   429
                                   R                 AGTTTGATTCTTGCGAACG
                                   F                  CTCCTGGAAACGGGTGG
      Bifidobacterium                                                                                51                   551
                                   R               GGTGTTCTTCCCGATATCTACA
                                   F                 AGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCCA
     Lactobacillus spp.                                                                              50                   334
                                   R                  CACCGCTACACATGGAG


                                4.20. qRT-PCR for the Detection of the Relative Abundance of Fusobacteria, Bifidobacteria,
                                Bacteroides, Clostridium, and Lactobacillus
                                      In order to evaluate the quantity of specific bacteria in the gut, we employed primers
                                for the 16S rDNA housekeeping gene. Fecal DNA (40–80 ng) was extracted and combined
                                with 12.5 µL (2 × SYBR Green PCR master mix (Willowfort Co., Birmingham, UK), 1.5 µL
                                of each forward and reverse primer (10 µmol), and 7.5 µL of nuclease-free water, resulting
                                in a final volume of 25 µL. Real-time PCR was performed on a MyGo machine using the
                                following cycling protocol: an initial 5 min denaturation step at 95 ◦ C, followed by 45 cycles
                                of 95 ◦ C for 20 s, annealing for 20 s, and 72 ◦ C for 40 s. The Ct values and melting curves
                                were obtained using MyGo software. The relative abundance of each bacterial species was
                                calculated as a relative unit normalized to the total bacteria in the corresponding sample,
                                using the 2−∆∆Ct method (where ∆Ct represents the average Ct value of each target minus
                                the average Ct value of total bacteria). The primer sequences for detecting the various
                                bacterial strains are listed in Table 2.

                                4.21. Statistical Analysis
                                      The statistical analysis was carried out using the GraphPad Prism software version 9
                                (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). The results were expressed as mean ± standard
                                deviation (SD). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed followed by Tukey’s
                                post hoc test to determine the differences between groups. To investigate the correlation be-
                                tween multiple variables, Pearson correlation analysis was conducted. Survival probability
                                was assessed by survival analysis comparisons, and survival curves were generated using
                                the log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test. All statistical tests were performed at a significance level of
                                less than 0.05.

                                Author Contributions: Data curation, S.S.; Formal analysis, S.S.; Funding acquisition, M.A.A.-R.
                                and O.A.M.; Investigation, S.S.; Methodology, S.S., M.M.S.A., J.A., L.A.S., S.A.-G., A.M.A., A.A.F.,
                                A.H.A., M.I.E.A., A.A.J.A., A.M.S.E., M.A.A.-R., H.A.R. and O.A.M.; Project administration, S.S.
                                and O.A.M.; Resources, O.A.M.; Software, S.S.; Supervision, S.S.; Validation, S.S.; Visualization, S.S.;
                                Writing—original draft, S.S.; Writing—review and editing, S.S., M.M.S.A., J.A., L.A.S., S.A.-G., A.M.A.,
                                A.A.F., A.H.A., M.I.E.A., A.A.J.A., A.M.S.E., M.A.A.-R., H.A.R. and O.A.M. All authors have read
                                and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                                        26 of 28




                                   Funding: This research received no external funding.
                                   Institutional Review Board Statement: All the in vivo protocols were approved by the IACUC at
                                   the Faculty of Pharmacy, Delta University for Science and Technology, Egypt, (approval number,
                                   FPDU24120).
                                   Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Data Availability Statement: Data is contained within the article.
                                   Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the Deanship of Scientific Research at Shaqra
                                   University for supporting this work. Osama Mohammed’s contribution is greatly appreciated. We
                                   acknowledge his efforts in coordinating the project and ensuring its smooth progression.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

                                   Abbreviations
                                        (R,R)-BD-AcAc2, (R)-3-Hydroxybutyl (R)-3-hydroxybutyrate ketone ester; ASC, apoptosis-
                                   associated speck-like protein containing a CARD; BECN1, Beclin-1; CLDN5, claudin-5; DAI, disease
                                   activity score; DSS, dextran sodium sulfate; GSDMD, gasdermin D; GSH, reduced glutathione; IBD,
                                   inflammatory bowel disease; KD, ketogenic diet; KE, ketone ester; MDA, malondialdehyde; MDI,
                                   macroscopic damage index; MPO, myeloperoxidase; NFκB, nuclear transcription factor kappa B;
                                   NGSDMD, gasdermin D N-terminal fragment; NLRP3, nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-
                                   like receptor protein 3; OCLN, occludin; p62, sequestosome-1; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SOD,
                                   superoxide dismutase; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-alpha; ZO-1, zonula occludens-1.


References
1.    Wang, R.; Li, Z.; Liu, S.; Zhang, D. Global, regional and national burden of inflammatory bowel disease in 204 countries and
      territories from 1990 to 2019: A systematic analysis based on the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. BMJ Open 2023, 13,
      e065186. [CrossRef]
2.    Jairath, V.; Feagan, B.G. Global burden of inflammatory bowel disease. Lancet. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2020, 5, 2–3. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
3.    Eaden, J.A.; Abrams, K.R.; Mayberry, J.F. The risk of colorectal cancer in ulcerative colitis: A meta-analysis. Gut 2001, 48, 526.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.    Weimers, P.; Vedel Ankersen, D.; Lophaven, S.; Bonderup, O.K.; Münch, A.; Løkkegaard, E.C.L.; Munkholm, P.; Burisch, J. Disease
      Activity Patterns, Mortality, and Colorectal Cancer Risk in Microscopic Colitis: A Danish Nationwide Cohort Study, 2001 to 2016.
      J. Crohn’s Colitis 2020, 15, 594–602. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.    Ramos, L.; Teo-Loy, J.; Barreiro-de Acosta, M. Disease clearance in ulcerative colitis: Setting the therapeutic goals for future in the
      treatment of ulcerative colitis. Front. Med. 2022, 9, 1102420. [CrossRef]
6.    Cavalu, S.; Sharaf, H.; Saber, S.; Youssef, M.E.; Abdelhamid, A.M.; Mourad, A.A.E.; Ibrahim, S.; Allam, S.; Elgharabawy, R.M.;
      El-Ahwany, E.; et al. Ambroxol, a mucolytic agent, boosts HO-1, suppresses NF-κB, and decreases the susceptibility of the
      inflamed rat colon to apoptosis: A new treatment option for treating ulcerative colitis. FASEB J. 2022, 36, e22496. [CrossRef]
7.    Liu, L.; Dong, Y.; Ye, M.; Jin, S.; Yang, J.; Joosse, M.E.; Sun, Y.; Zhang, J.; Lazarev, M.; Brant, S.R.; et al. The Pathogenic Role of
      NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation in Inflammatory Bowel Diseases of Both Mice and Humans. J. Crohn’s Colitis 2017, 11, 737–750.
      [CrossRef]
8.    Franchi, L.; Muñoz-Planillo, R.; Núñez, G. Sensing and reacting to microbes through the inflammasomes. Nat. Immunol. 2012, 13,
      325–332. [CrossRef]
9.    Zhou, R.; Tardivel, A.; Thorens, B.; Choi, I.; Tschopp, J. Thioredoxin-interacting protein links oxidative stress to inflammasome
      activation. Nat. Immunol. 2010, 11, 136–140. [CrossRef]
10.   Kayagaki, N.; Stowe, I.B.; Lee, B.L.; O’Rourke, K.; Anderson, K.; Warming, S.; Cuellar, T.; Haley, B.; Roose-Girma, M.; Phung, Q.T.;
      et al. Caspase-11 cleaves gasdermin D for non-canonical inflammasome signalling. Nature 2015, 526, 666–671. [CrossRef]
11.   Shi, J.; Zhao, Y.; Wang, K.; Shi, X.; Wang, Y.; Huang, H.; Zhuang, Y.; Cai, T.; Wang, F.; Shao, F. Cleavage of GSDMD by inflammatory
      caspases determines pyroptotic cell death. Nature 2015, 526, 660–665. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Yang, D.; Wang, Z.; Chen, Y.; Guo, Q.; Dong, Y. Interactions between gut microbes and NLRP3 inflammasome in the gut-brain
      axis. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 2023, 21, 2215–2227. [CrossRef]
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                                         27 of 28




13.   Saber, S.; Abd El-Fattah, E.E.; Yahya, G.; Gobba, N.A.; Maghmomeh, A.O.; Khodir, A.E.; Mourad, A.A.E.; Saad, A.S.; Mohammed,
      H.G.; Nouh, N.A.; et al. A Novel Combination Therapy Using Rosuvastatin and Lactobacillus Combats Dextran Sodium
      Sulfate-Induced Colitis in High-Fat Diet-Fed Rats by Targeting the TXNIP/NLRP3 Interaction and Influencing Gut Microbiome
      Composition. Pharmaceuticals 2021, 14, 341. [CrossRef]
14.   Kobayashi, S. Choose Delicately and Reuse Adequately: The Newly Revealed Process of Autophagy. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 2015, 38,
      1098–1103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.   Abd El-Fattah, E.E.; Saber, S.; Youssef, M.E.; Eissa, H.; El-Ahwany, E.; Amin, N.A.; Alqarni, M.; Batiha, G.E.-S.; Obaidullah, A.J.;
      Kaddah, M.M.Y.; et al. AKT-AMPKα-mTOR-dependent HIF-1α Activation is a New Therapeutic Target for Cancer Treatment: A
      Novel Approach to Repositioning the Antidiabetic Drug Sitagliptin for the Management of Hepatocellular Carcinoma. Front.
      Pharmacol. 2022, 12, 4018. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.   Macias-Ceja, D.C.; Barrachina, M.D.; Ortiz-Masià, D. Autophagy in intestinal fibrosis: Relevance in inflammatory bowel disease.
      Front. Pharmacol. 2023, 14, 1170436. [CrossRef]
17.   Youssef, M.E.; Abd El-Fattah, E.E.; Abdelhamid, A.M.; Eissa, H.; El-Ahwany, E.; Amin, N.A.; Hetta, H.F.; Mahmoud, M.H.; Batiha,
      G.E.-S.; Gobba, N.; et al. Interference With the AMPKα/mTOR/NLRP3 Signaling and the IL-23/IL-17 Axis Effectively Protects
      Against the Dextran Sulfate Sodium Intoxication in Rats: A New Paradigm in Empagliflozin and Metformin Reprofiling for the
      Management of Ulcerative Colitis. Front. Pharmacol. 2021, 12, 719984. [CrossRef]
18.   Nasr, M.; Cavalu, S.; Saber, S.; Youssef, M.E.; Abdelhamid, A.M.; Elagamy, H.I.; Kamal, I.; Gaafar, A.G.A.; El-Ahwany, E.; Amin,
      N.A.; et al. Canagliflozin-loaded chitosan-hyaluronic acid microspheres modulate AMPK/NF-κB/NLRP3 axis: A new paradigm
      in the rectal therapy of ulcerative colitis. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2022, 153, 113409. [CrossRef]
19.   Devenport, S.N.; Shah, Y.M. Functions and Implications of Autophagy in Colon Cancer. Cells 2019, 8, 1349. [CrossRef]
20.   Sheng, Y.H.; Giri, R.; Davies, J.; Schreiber, V.; Alabbas, S.; Movva, R.; He, Y.; Wu, A.; Hooper, J.; McWhinney, B.; et al. A
      Nucleotide Analog Prevents Colitis-Associated Cancer via Beta-Catenin Independently of Inflammation and Autophagy. Cell.
      Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2021, 11, 33–53. [CrossRef]
21.   Pott, J.; Maloy, K.J. Epithelial autophagy controls chronic colitis by reducing TNF-induced apoptosis. Autophagy 2018, 14,
      1460–1461. [CrossRef]
22.   Youm, Y.-H.; Nguyen, K.Y.; Grant, R.W.; Goldberg, E.L.; Bodogai, M.; Kim, D.; D’Agostino, D.; Planavsky, N.; Lupfer, C.;
      Kanneganti, T.D.; et al. The ketone metabolite β-hydroxybutyrate blocks NLRP3 inflammasome–mediated inflammatory disease.
      Nat. Med. 2015, 21, 263–269. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.   Fu, S.-P.; Wang, J.-F.; Xue, W.-J.; Liu, H.-M.; Liu, B.-r.; Zeng, Y.-L.; Li, S.-N.; Huang, B.-X.; Lv, Q.-K.; Wang, W.; et al. Anti-
      inflammatory effects of BHBA in both in vivo and in vitro Parkinson’s disease models are mediated by GPR109A-dependent
      mechanisms. J. Neuroinflamm. 2015, 12, 9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Vasconcelos, A.R.; Yshii, L.M.; Viel, T.A.; Buck, H.S.; Mattson, M.P.; Scavone, C.; Kawamoto, E.M. Intermittent fasting attenuates
      lipopolysaccharide-induced neuroinflammation and memory impairment. J. Neuroinflamm. 2014, 11, 85. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.   MacDonald, L.; Hazi, A.; Paolini, A.G.; Kent, S. Calorie restriction dose-dependently abates lipopolysaccharide-induced fever,
      sickness behavior, and circulating interleukin-6 while increasing corticosterone. Brain Behav. Immun. 2014, 40, 18–26. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
26.   Ruskin, D.N.; Kawamura, M.; Masino, S.A. Reduced pain and inflammation in juvenile and adult rats fed a ketogenic diet. PLoS
      ONE 2009, 4, e8349. [CrossRef]
27.   Plecko, B.; Stoeckler-Ipsiroglu, S.; Schober, E.; Harrer, G.; Mlynarik, V.; Gruber, S.; Moser, E.; Moeslinger, D.; Silgoner, H.;
      Ipsiroglu, O. Oral β-Hydroxybutyrate Supplementation in Two Patients with Hyperinsulinemic Hypoglycemia: Monitoring of
      β-Hydroxybutyrate Levels in Blood and Cerebrospinal Fluid, and in the Brain by In Vivo Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy.
      Pediatr. Res. 2002, 52, 301–306. [CrossRef]
28.   Poff, A.M.; Rho, J.M.; D’Agostino, D.P. Ketone Administration for Seizure Disorders: History and Rationale for Ketone Esters and
      Metabolic Alternatives. Front. Neurosci. 2019, 13, 1041. [CrossRef]
29.   Pawlosky, R.J.; Kashiwaya, Y.; King, M.T.; Veech, R.L. A Dietary Ketone Ester Normalizes Abnormal Behavior in a Mouse Model
      of Alzheimer’s Disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 1044. [CrossRef]
30.   Cabrera-Mulero, A.; Tinahones, A.; Bandera, B.; Moreno-Indias, I.; Macías-González, M.; Tinahones, F.J. Keto microbiota: A
      powerful contributor to host disease recovery. Rev. Endocr. Metab. Disord. 2019, 20, 415–425. [CrossRef]
31.   Qi, J.; Gan, L.; Fang, J.; Zhang, J.; Yu, X.; Guo, H.; Cai, D.; Cui, H.; Gou, L.; Deng, J.; et al. Beta-Hydroxybutyrate: A Dual Function
      Molecular and Immunological Barrier Function Regulator. Front. Immunol. 2022, 13, 805881. [CrossRef]
32.   Hoffmann, M.; Schwertassek, U.; Seydel, A.; Weber, K.; Falk, W.; Hauschildt, S.; Lehmann, J. A refined and translationally relevant
      model of chronic DSS colitis in BALB/c mice. Lab. Anim. 2017, 52, 240–252. [CrossRef]
33.   Poff, A.M.; Ari, C.; Arnold, P.; Seyfried, T.N.; D’Agostino, D.P. Ketone supplementation decreases tumor cell viability and
      prolongs survival of mice with metastatic cancer. Int. J. Cancer 2014, 135, 1711–1720. [CrossRef]
Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 953                                                                                                      28 of 28




34.   Abdelhamid, A.M.; Youssef, M.E.; Abd El-Fattah, E.E.; Gobba, N.A.; Gaafar, A.G.A.; Girgis, S.; Shata, A.; Hafez, A.-M.; El-Ahwany,
      E.; Amin, N.A.; et al. Blunting p38 MAPKα and ERK1/2 activities by empagliflozin enhances the antifibrotic effect of metformin
      and augments its AMPK-induced NF-κB inactivation in mice intoxicated with carbon tetrachloride. Life Sci. 2021, 286, 120070.
      [CrossRef]
35.   Saber, S.; Nasr, M.; Saad, A.S.; Mourad, A.A.E.; Gobba, N.A.; Shata, A.; Hafez, A.-M.; Elsergany, R.N.; Elagamy, H.I.; El-Ahwany, E.;
      et al. Albendazole-loaded cubosomes interrupt the ERK1/2-HIF-1α-p300/CREB axis in mice intoxicated with diethylnitrosamine:
      A new paradigm in drug repurposing for the inhibition of hepatocellular carcinoma progression. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2021, 142,
      112029. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
