             microorganisms

Article
Alteration of Colonic Bacterial and Fungal Composition and
Their Inter- and Intra-Kingdom Interaction in Patients with
Adenomas with Low-Grade Dysplasia
Ding Heng 1 , Min Zhang 1 , Yuhan Yuan 2 and Xinyun Qiu 1,3, *

                                         1   Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, No. 300,
                                             Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, China; yznyhd@yeah.net (D.H.); zhangmin0717@126.com (M.Z.)
                                         2   Department of Endoscopic Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, No. 300,
                                             Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, China; yuanyuhan512@126.com
                                         3   F. Widjaja Inflammatory Bowel and Immunobiology Research Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,
                                             Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA
                                         *   Correspondence: qiuxinyun@jsph.org.cn


                                         Abstract: Colorectal cancer (CRC) develops from pre-cancerous cellular lesions in the gut epithelium
                                         and mainly originates from specific types of colonic adenomas with dysplasia. However, gut micro-
                                         biota signatures among sampling sites in patients with colorectal adenomas with low-grade dysplasia
                                         (ALGD) and normal control (NC) remain uncharacterized. To characterize gut microbial and fungal
                                         profiles in ALGD and normal colorectal mucosa tissues. We used 16S and ITS1-2 rRNA gene se-
                                         quencing and bioinformatics analysis on the microbiota of ALGD and normal colorectal mucosa from
                                         40 subjects. Bacterial sequences in the ALGD group showed an increase in Rhodobacterales, Thermales,
                                         Thermaceae, Rhodobacteraceae, and several genera, including Thermus, Paracoccus, Sphingobium, and
                                         Pseudomonas, compared to the NC group. Fungal sequences in the ALGD group showed an increase
                                         in Helotiales, Leotiomycetes, and Basidiomycota, while several orders, families, and genera, including
                                         Verrucariales, Russulales, and Trichosporonales, were decreased. The study found various interactions
Citation: Heng, D.; Zhang, M.; Yuan,     between intestinal bacteria and fungi. The bacterial functional analysis showed increased glycogen
Y.; Qiu, X. Alteration of Colonic        and vanillin degradation pathways in the ALGD group. Meanwhile, the fungal functional analysis
Bacterial and Fungal Composition         showed a decrease in pathways related to the biosynthesis of gondoate and stearate, as well as
and Their Inter- and Intra-Kingdom       degradation of glucose, starch, glycogen, sucrose, L-tryptophan, and pantothenate, and an increase
Interaction in Patients with
                                         in the octane oxidation pathway in the ALGD group. The mucosal microbiota in ALGD exhibits
Adenomas with Low-Grade
                                         altered fungal and microbial composition compared to the NC mucosa, potentially contributing to
Dysplasia. Microorganisms 2023, 11,
                                         the development of intestinal cancer by regulating specific metabolic pathways. Therefore, these
1327. https://doi.org/10.3390/
                                         changes in microbiota and metabolic pathways may be potential markers for diagnosing and treating
microorganisms11051327
                                         colorectal adenoma and carcinoma.
Academic Editor: Francesca
Romana Ponziani                          Keywords: intestinal bacteria; intestinal fungi; colorectal adenomas; low-grade dysplasia
Received: 20 March 2023
Revised: 8 May 2023
Accepted: 15 May 2023
Published: 18 May 2023                   1. Background
                                              Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cause of cancer-related deaths [1].
                                         Approximately 5% of the population suffers from CRC, and 90% of cases occur after the
                                         age of 50 years [2]. Most CRCs originate from specific types of colonic adenomas, which
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
                                         result from sporadic mutations in the colorectal polyp pathway or DNA mismatch repair
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                         and, by definition, include low-grade dysplasia [2]. Since the 1960s, the microbiome has
This article is an open access article
                                         been hypothesized to play a role in CRC carcinogenesis. Bacterial strains are altered during
distributed under the terms and
                                         adenoma-carcinoma development [3,4], and fungal strains, including Malassezia and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                         Candida, are aggravated in the gut of patients with CRC [5]. Most studies have compared
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                         the intestinal microbiome of healthy individuals to those with CRC or colonic adenomas
4.0/).                                   using stool samples. However, the luminal microbiome is usually not a real colonizer




Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms11051327                        https://www.mdpi.com/journal/microorganisms
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                             2 of 14




                                but could instead be a transient environmental microbiota which cannot adhere to the
                                colonic mucosa and interact with the mucosal immune system [6,7]. Therefore, studying the
                                microbiota composition of mucosal samples is crucial. However, it’s important to note that
                                microbiota profiles can vary significantly between individuals due to various factors, such
                                as diet, environment, immune responses, medication usage, etc. Therefore, the findings on
                                gut microbiota are inconsistent across previous studies.
                                     The gut microbiota comprises bacteria, fungi, viruses, and protozoa [8]. Bacteria have
                                received the most attention due to their abundance and ease of isolation, culture, and
                                identification. However, technological advancements have revealed that fungi and other
                                microorganisms also play crucial roles in gut health and disease [9]. In the past, fungi were
                                often overlooked in research due to their difficulty in identification and characterization,
                                and previous studies focused mainly on bacterial communities [9]. Consequently, their
                                significance in gut health and disease may have been underestimated or ignored.
                                     To better understand the role of microbiota in the progression toward CRC, it is
                                important to explore the microbiota in direct proximity to the epithelium. Therefore,
                                obtaining mucosal specimens from precursor lesions and tumors could provide greater
                                insight into mucosa-associated microbiota. In this study, we conducted a metagenomic
                                profiling analysis of both bacterial and fungal microbiota in colonic mucosal samples from
                                patients with adenomas with low-grade dysplasia (ALGD) and normal controls (NC). We
                                aimed to characterize the different microbiota composition of adenoma mucosa against
                                their normal control (NC) and explore inter- and intra-kingdom correlations between
                                intestinal bacteria and fungi. This can provide insight into colorectal tumorigenesis.

                                2. Methods
                                2.1. Patients and Biopsy Sample Collection
                                     Colorectal biopsies were collected at the Endoscopic Center of the First Affiliated
                                Hospital of Nanjing Medical University. All subjects underwent colonoscopy for screening
                                and were found to have colonic polyps. Specimens from polyps and the adjacent normal
                                control mucosa were biopsied and stored at −80 ◦ C for further analysis. All of the included
                                participants finished the complete colon examination, and subjects with the following con-
                                ditions were excluded: (1) with intestinal inflammation or had a history of pigmentation
                                polyposis syndrome, familial intestinal polyps; (2) with gastroenterology surgery history;
                                (3) with malignant tumors and cachexia, or a history of radiation or chemotherapy;
                                (4) Female subjects who were pregnant or lactating. (5) less than 18 years old; (6) par-
                                ticipants had taken antibiotics, anti-fungal agents, probiotics, or prebiotics for at least eight
                                weeks before enrollment. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. In
                                addition, the clinical characteristics of the participants were recorded, including age, sex,
                                disease history, pathological pattern, and histology. The study protocol was approved by
                                the Medical Ethics Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University
                                (Approval Code: 2020-5R-412).

                                2.2. DNA Extraction, PCR Amplification, and 16S rRNA Gene Sequencing
                                     The E.Z.N.A.® Stool DNA Kit (D4015, Omega Inc., Norwalk, CT, USA) was utilized to
                                extract total genomic DNA from mucosal biopsy samples, following the manufacturer’s
                                protocol. The eluted total DNA was stored at −80 ◦ C before PCR analysis, with an elution
                                buffer volume of 50 µL. Validation of DNA concentration and quality was accomplished
                                via a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and
                                2% agarose gel (Tanon, Shanghai, China). Nuclease-free water control was used as a
                                blank control.
                                     The universal primers 341F (50 -CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-30 ) and 805R
                                (5 -GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-30 ) were utilized to perform PCR analysis of the V3-V4
                                  0

                                variable regions of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene. For amplification of the eukaryotic (fungi)
                                small-subunit rRNA gene’s ITS2 region, the ITS1FI2 (50 -GTGARTCATCGAATCTTTG-30 )
                                and ITS2 (50 -TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-30 ) primer sets were employed. Specific bar-
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                            3 of 14




                                codes for each sample and sequencing universal primers were attached to the 5’ ends of
                                the primers.
                                      A 25 µL reaction mixture was utilized for the PCR reaction, incorporating 25 ng of
                                template DNA, 12.5 µL of High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix (NEB), 2.5 µL of each primer
                                (1 µM), and PCR-grade water as needed to reach the proper volume. To amplify the
                                prokaryotic 16S fragments, the PCR conditions consisted of an initial denaturation step at
                                98 ◦ C for 30 s, followed by 32 cycles for 16S rRNA (36 cycles for ITS1-2 rRNA). These cycles
                                included a denaturation stage at 98 ◦ C for 10 s, an annealing stage at 54 ◦ C for 30 s, and an
                                extension stage at 72 ◦ C for 45 s. The final extension was conducted at 72 ◦ C for 10 min.
                                The PCR products were verified through 2% agarose gel electrophoresis (run at a constant
                                voltage of 120 V for 40 min). Regarding DNA extraction, ultrapure water was employed as
                                a negative control to exclude the possibility of positive PCR results.
                                      The amplicon was purified with AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter, Carlsbad, CA,
                                USA) and subjected to a secondary PCR reaction. The final amplicon was quantified using
                                a Qubit dsDNA assay kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). A sequencing library was
                                generated using the TruSeq® DNA PCR-Free Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina, San Diego,
                                CA, USA) as per the manufacturer’s instructions and assessed on the Qubit@ 2.0 Fluorome-
                                ter (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system
                                (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The library was sequenced on an Illumina
                                NovaSeq (PE250) high-throughput platform, and 250 bp paired-end reads were generated.
                                The PCR products were purified by the Qiaquick gel extraction kit (Qiagen Hilden, Ger-
                                many). Amplicon pools were prepared for sequencing, and the size and abundance of the
                                amplicon library were evaluated with an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara,
                                CA, USA) and Library Quantification Kit for Illumina (Kapa Biosciences, Woburn, MA,
                                USA), respectively. The sequencing of libraries was performed on the NovaSeq PE250
                                platform. After removing the background, the feature list and sequence were obtained, and
                                a non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) analysis was conducted.

                                2.3. Bioinformatic Analysis
                                     The samples were subjected to sequencing on an Illumina NovaSeq platform using
                                a paired-end 250 run. Unique barcodes were used to assign paired-end reads to different
                                samples, then merged with FLASH. First, quality filtering was performed on the raw reads,
                                and high-quality clean tags were obtained with fqtrim (v0.94). Next, the chimeric sequences
                                were removed using Vsearch software (v2.3.4), and subsequently, the feature table and
                                feature sequence were generated using the DADA2 pipeline.
                                     Alpha and beta diversity were determined by randomly normalizing the same se-
                                quences and analyzing them with QIIME2. The resulting data was used to generate graphs
                                using an R package. Alpha diversity was applied using richness (Chao1 index) and di-
                                versity (Shannon and Simpson index) indices. Beta diversity analysis was employed to
                                compare groups among samples, and non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) anal-
                                ysis and principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) was carried out using a weighted UniFrac
                                distance matrix. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size [10] was used to identify
                                differentially abundant bacterial taxa associated with groups of participants. The LDA
                                value threshold was set at two, and the t-test and Wilcoxon signed-rank test were employed
                                to assess the significance using QIIME (version 1.9.0). Prediction of metagenomic functions
                                was carried out using Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Un-
                                observed States (PICRUSt2) based on the normalized bacterial and fungal OTU tables [11].
                                Pathways differing in abundance between the ALGD and NC groups were obtained using
                                Welch’s t-test, and the Storey FDR was used to correct for multiple tests.

                                2.4. Correlation Analysis
                                    Pearson’s correlation was used to test whether a relationship existed between bacterial
                                and fungal diversity on Shannon’s index and taxon relative abundance. The correlation
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                                4 of 14




                                between bacterial and fungal taxon relative abundance in the ALGD group was measured
                                by distance correlation and as described previously [12].

                                2.5. Statistics
                                      Differences in the Shannon, Simpson, and Chao1 diversity indices between the two
                                groups were analyzed using the Wilcoxon test. Intergroup differences at the phylum,
                                class, order, family, genus, and species level in each cluster were analyzed by the linear
                                discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) method [13] with default settings on the
                                Galaxy/Hutlab website (https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/galaxy/root, accessed
                                on 1 January 2023). The correlations between Shannon, Simpson, and Chao1 diversity
                                indices were measured using Spearman’s rank coefficients. Similarly, the correlation
                                between bacterial and fungal taxa at the phylum and genus level was also measured using
                                Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. Mann-Whitney U test was used to determine
                                statistically significant differences between bacterial and fungal relative abundance in
                                ALGD and NC samples. A p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

                                3. Results
                                3.1. Charistics of Subjects
                                     A total of 117 participants were initially enrolled in this study. However, 44 participants
                                were first excluded due to malignant tumors and cachexia history (n = 12), gastroenterology
                                surgery history (n = 5), pregnant or lactating (n = 2), or taken antibiotics or probiotics
                                (or prebiotics) within eight months (n = 25) before the colonoscopy. Subsequently, an
                                additional 33 participants were excluded due to the presence of intestinal inflammation
                                (n = 6) or their intestinal specimens being diagnosed as hyperplastic polyps (n = 15), high-
                                grade intraepithelial (n = 8), or neoplastic tumors (n = 4) during colonoscopy. Forty (aged
                                between 22–56 years, 18 females and 22 males) subjects diagnosed with colonic adenoma
                                with low-grade dysplasia were included (Supplementary Figure S1).

                                3.2. Global Shifts in the Colonic Microbes
                                      To observe the changes in the colonic microbes in colorectal ALGD and their adjacent
                                normal control tissue, we analyzed sequencing on 80 colonical mucosal biopsies (40 ALGD
                                and their NC) from 40 patients. An average of 98,250 high-quality paired reads were
                                obtained for each sample, and operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were defined using a
                                97% similarity cut-off value. The Venn diagram showed that 2947 OTUs were generated
                                from ALGD samples and 3131 OTUs were generated from the NC, with 1520 OTUs shared
                                between both groups, indicating a greater bacterial diversity in the NC colonic mucosa
                                (Figure 1A). The rarefaction curve exhibits that the current sequencing depths were suf-
                                ficient, and no new OTUs were detected when the sequencing depth was increased
                                (Figure 1B). The bacterial composition did not differ significantly between ALGD and
                                NC groups using the PCoA (Figure 1C). To further evaluate the alpha diversity and beta
                                diversity in both groups, the Chao1, Simpson, and Shannon index between groups did
                                not show remarkable differences between groups, and the beta diversity analysis did not
                                show distinct clusters between groups (Figure 1D–F). Interestingly, the Chao1, Simpson,
                                and Shannon index in the ALGD group was positively correlated with that in the NC
                                (Figure 1G–I).
                                      We further analyzed the colonic bacterial composition of the two groups. The bac-
                                terial community from the 40 participants’ mucosal samples was classified into 33 phyla,
                                104 classes, 217 orders, 352 families, and 815 genera (Supplementary Table S1). At the phy-
                                lum level, the intestinal microbiome was dominated by Proteobacteria (47.71%), Firmicutes
                                (22.34%), Bacteroidota (17.14%), and_Fusobacteriota (8.50%) (Figure 2A). When analyzed at
                                the genera level, sixteen genera, namely Escherichia-Shigella, Bacteroides, Fusobacterium, Fae-
                                calibacterium, Haemophilus, Citrobacter, Klebsiella, Intestinibacter, Streptococcus, Actinobacillus,
                                Sutterella, Prevotella, Roseburia, Prevotella_9, Ruminococcus torques group, and Acinetobacter
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                                         5 of 14



  Microorganisms 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                                    were                                                                                5 of 16
                                          identified above 1% on average (Figure 2B). Interestingly, no significant differences
                                   were observed in the major bacterial phyla and genera between the two groups (Figure 2B).




                                      Figure1.1.Colonic
                                     Figure        Colonic mucosal
                                                            mucosal bacterial    richnessand
                                                                      bacterial richness  anddiversity
                                                                                                diversityininadenomas
                                                                                                              adenomaswith
                                                                                                                         withlow-grade
                                                                                                                                low-grade  dysplasia
                                                                                                                                          dysplasia
                                      (ALGD)and
                                     (ALGD)      andnormal
                                                      normal control
                                                               control (NC) tissues.
                                                                             tissues. Bacterial
                                                                                       Bacterialcomposition
                                                                                                 compositionininthe
                                                                                                                  theALGD
                                                                                                                      ALGDtissues   was
                                                                                                                              tissues   compared
                                                                                                                                      was  compared
                                      withthe
                                     with    theadjacent
                                                  adjacent NC.
                                                            NC. (A)
                                                                 (A) Bacterial
                                                                     Bacterial operational
                                                                                operationaltaxonomic
                                                                                             taxonomicunits
                                                                                                          units(OTUs)
                                                                                                                (OTUs)number
                                                                                                                         numberininALGD
                                                                                                                                      ALGD mucosa
                                                                                                                                             mucosa
                                      and   NC   in the colon.  (B) Rarefaction  analysis of sampling  by   observed  bacterial OTU.  (C)
                                     and NC in the colon. (B) Rarefaction analysis of sampling by observed bacterial OTU. (C) Principal   Principal
                                      coordinates analysis (PCoA) based on the relative abundance of bacterial OTUs in ALGD and NC.
                                     coordinates analysis (PCoA) based on the relative abundance of bacterial OTUs in ALGD and NC.
                                      (D) Shannon, (E) Simpson, and (F) Chao 1 index between ALGD mucosa and NC in the colon. The
                                     (D)  Shannon,
                                      ecologic        (E) Simpson,
                                                  associations  of (G)and  (F) Chao
                                                                       Shannon,    (H)1Simpson,
                                                                                        index between
                                                                                                  and (I)ALGD
                                                                                                           Chao 1mucosa   and NC ALGD
                                                                                                                   index between   in the colon.
                                                                                                                                           and NCThe
                                     ecologic
                                      groups.
                       Microorganisms 2023,
                                                 associations
                                            11, xEach
                                                                of (G) Shannon, (H) Simpson, and (I) Chao 1 index between ALGD and NC 6 of 16
                                                      dot represent
                                                 FOR PEER   REVIEW one subject; gray area represents 95% confidence interval for best-fit line.
                                     groups. Each dot represent one subject; gray area represents 95% confidence interval for best-fit line.
                                         We further analyzed the colonic bacterial composition of the two groups. The
                                    bacterial community from the 40 participants’ mucosal samples was classified into 33
                                    phyla, 104 classes, 217 orders, 352 families, and 815 genera (Supplementary Table S1). At
                                    the phylum level, the intestinal microbiome was dominated by Proteobacteria (47.71%),
                                    Firmicutes (22.34%), Bacteroidota (17.14%), and_Fusobacteriota (8.50%) (Figure 2A). When
                                    analyzed at the genera level, sixteen genera, namely Escherichia-Shigella, Bacteroides,
                                    Fusobacterium, Faecalibacterium, Haemophilus, Citrobacter, Klebsiella, Intestinibacter,
                                    Streptococcus, Actinobacillus, Sutterella, Prevotella, Roseburia, Prevotella_9, Ruminococcus
                                    torques group, and Acinetobacter were identified above 1% on average (Figure 2B).
                                    Interestingly, no significant diﬀerences were observed in the major bacterial phyla and
                                    genera between the two groups (Figure 2B).

                                   Figure 2. Cont.
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                                               6 of 14




                                Figure 2. Characterization
                                                  Figure 2. of   microbiomeofdistribution
                                                             Characterization     microbiome in    patients in
                                                                                                distribution  with   adenomas
                                                                                                                  patients with with    low-grade
                                                                                                                                 adenomas    with low-grade
                                dysplasia (ALGD). dysplasia
                                                    Relative (ALGD).  Relative
                                                               abundance        abundance of
                                                                            of bacterial   phylabacterial
                                                                                                   (A) and phyla (A) and
                                                                                                             genera    (B) in the (B)
                                                                                                                           genera     in theand
                                                                                                                                   ALGD      ALGDNCand NC
                                                  groups.representation
                                groups. (C) Taxonomic      (C)Taxonomic representation
                                                                          of statisticallyofand
                                                                                             statistically and biologically
                                                                                                 biologically    consistentconsistent
                                                                                                                             differencesdiﬀerences
                                                                                                                                           betweenbetween
                                                  colonic ALGD and NC groups. (D)Histogram of the LDA scores (log10) computed for features
                                colonic ALGD and     NC groups. (D) Histogram of the LDA scores (log10) computed for features
                                                  diﬀerentially abundant in colonic ALGD and NC.
                                differentially abundant in colonic ALGD and NC.
                                                       LEfSe analysis was used to determine the specific bacteria taxa associated with
                                      LEfSe analysis  wasCompared
                                                  ALGD.      used to determine
                                                                          with thethe NC, specific    bacteriabundance
                                                                                              the relative       taxa associated     with ALGD. was
                                                                                                                              of Acidaminococcus
                                Compared withsignificantly
                                                   the NC, thedecreased
                                                                  relative abundance         of  Acidaminococcus          was   significantly
                                                                             in the Abiotrophia genus and species in the ALGD group              de-(Figure
                                creased in the Abiotrophia      genus   and   species   in  the  ALGD       group   (Figure    2C,
                                                  2C, D). However, the orders Rhodobacterales and Thermales; the families ThermaceaeD). However,
                                                  and Rhodobacteraceae;
                                the orders Rhodobacterales                   the genera
                                                                 and Thermales;            Thermus, Thermaceae
                                                                                     the families      Paracoccus, and   Sphingobium;
                                                                                                                       and               and Pseudomonas
                                                                                                                             Rhodobacteraceae;
                                                  species   were increased   in the ALGD     group    compared     with
                                the genera Thermus, Paracoccus, and Sphingobium; and Pseudomonas species were increased   that in the NC   (Figure 2C,D).
                                in the ALGD group compared with that in the NC (Figure 2C,D).
                                                    3.3. Global Shifts in the Colonic Fungi
                                3.3. Global Shifts in the
                                                       WeColonic
                                                          furtherFungi
                                                                  observed changes in colonic fungi in colorectal ALGD and adjacent NC
                                      We furthertissues
                                                   observedfrom the 40 participants. An average of 92,112 high-quality paired reads were
                                                                changes in colonic fungi in colorectal ALGD and adjacent NC
                                                  obtained for each sample, and operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were defined using a
                                tissues from the 40 participants. An average of 92,112 high-quality paired reads were
                                                  97% similarity cut-oﬀ value. The Venn diagram showed that 627 OTUs were generated
                                obtained for each    sample, and operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were defined using a
                                                  from ALGD samples and 1124 OTUs were generated from the NC, with 294 OTUs shared
                                97% similarity cut-off
                                                  betweenvalue.
                                                             bothThe   Vennindicating
                                                                   groups,    diagram showed
                                                                                         a greaterthat   627 diversity
                                                                                                     fungal    OTUs were      generated
                                                                                                                         in the            frommucosa
                                                                                                                                  NC colonic
                                ALGD samples and       11243A).
                                                  (Figure    OTUs Thewere   generated
                                                                       rarefaction      from
                                                                                     curve     the NC,
                                                                                            showed       withe294
                                                                                                       that          OTUs shared
                                                                                                                  current   sequencingbetween
                                                                                                                                          depths were
                                both groups, indicating
                                                  suﬃcient,aand greater
                                                                    no newfungal   diversity in
                                                                              operational         the NCunits
                                                                                             taxonomic       colonic   mucosa
                                                                                                                  (OTUs)   were (Figure
                                                                                                                                  detected3A).when the
                                The rarefaction curve     showed
                                                  sequencing         that
                                                                 depth  wastheincreased
                                                                                current (Figure
                                                                                         sequencing      depths
                                                                                                    3B). The       werecomposition
                                                                                                                fungal    sufficient, did
                                                                                                                                       and not diﬀer
                                new operationalsignificantly      between
                                                    taxonomic units         ALGD and
                                                                          (OTUs)    wereNC     groupswhen
                                                                                          detected      using the
                                                                                                                the PCoA     (Figure
                                                                                                                    sequencing        1C). was
                                                                                                                                   depth    Concerning
                                increased (Figure    3B).and
                                                  alpha    Thebeta  diversities
                                                                fungal          in both did
                                                                          composition   groups,nothe  Chao1 index
                                                                                                    differ            was between
                                                                                                            significantly  significantly  decreased in
                                                                                                                                        ALGD
                                and NC groups the usingALGD     group (Figure
                                                          the PCoA      compared 1C).with  the NC group
                                                                                      Concerning      alpha (Figure
                                                                                                               and beta 3F),  reveling in
                                                                                                                          diversities   theboth
                                                                                                                                             significant
                                                  decrease   of fungal   species  diversity in  the ALGD      group.
                                groups, the Chao1 index was significantly decreased in the ALGD group compared with and
                                                                                                                      In addition,   the Simpson
                                                  Shannon indices between groups did not show remarkable diﬀerences and were not
                                the NC group (Figure 3F), reveling the significant decrease of fungal species diversity in the
                                                  significantly correlated with each other between the groups (Figure 3D,E). Interestingly,
                                ALGD group. In addition, the Simpson and Shannon indices between groups did not show
                                                  the Chao1, Simpson, and Shannon index in the ALGD group did not significantly correlate
                                remarkable differences
                                                  with thatand    were
                                                             in the  NC not  significantly
                                                                         (Figure  3G–I).      correlated with each other between the
                                groups (Figure 3D,E). Interestingly, the Chao1, Simpson, and Shannon index in the ALGD
                                group did not significantly correlate with that in the NC (Figure 3G–I).
                                      We further analyzed the composition of fungal bacteria in ALGD and NC groups. The
                                fungal community from the 40 participants’ mucosal samples was classified into ten phyla,
                                37 classes, 84 orders, 183 families, and 327 genera (Supplementary Table S2). At the phylum
                                level, the intestinal fungi were dominated by Ascomycota (72.91%), Basidiomycota (17.61%),
                                and Zygomycota (4.44%) (Figure 4A). When analyzed on the genera level, twenty-one
                                genera, namely Alternaria, Malassezia, Microascus, Ascomycota_unclassified, Davidiella, Gib-
                                berella, Phialemonium, Actinomucor, Candida, Valsaceae_unclassified, Mortierella, Cladosporium,
                                Phialocephala, Aspergillus, Cryptococcus, Talaromyces, Acremonium, Saccharomyces, Thermoascus,
                                Lycoperdon, and Cyllamyces were identified above 1% on average (Figure 4B). However, no
                                significant differences were found in the major fungal phyla and genera (Figure 4B).
                                      LEfSe analysis was used to identify the specific fungal taxa associated with ALGD.
                                Compared with NC, the relative abundance of Helotiales, Leotiomycetes, and Basidiomycota
                                increased at the order, class, and phylum levels, respectively (Figure 4C,D). While the Verru-
                                cariales, Russulales, and Trichosporonales were decreased at the order level, the Didymellaceae,
                                Pleosporales_Incertae_sedis, Eurotiales_Incertae_sedis, Verrucariaceae, Sordariales_unclassified,
                                Entolomataceae, and Trichosporonaceae were decreased at the family level; Strelitziana, Ther-
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                                                     7 of 14




                                     momyces,
    Microorganisms 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW Verrucariaceae_unclassified, Nectria, Neonectria, Sordariales_unclassified, 7 of
                                                                                                                          Entoloma,
                                                                                                                                16
                                    and Trichosporon were decreased at the genus level (Figure 4C,D).




                                        Figure
                                     Figure   3. 3.Colonic
                                                     Colonicmucosal
                                                              mucosal fungal
                                                                        fungal richness
                                                                                richness and
                                                                                           anddiversity
                                                                                                diversityininadenomas
                                                                                                              adenomas  with
                                                                                                                          withlow-grade
                                                                                                                                 low-grade   dysplasia
                                                                                                                                                dysplasia
                                        (ALGD)
                                     (ALGD)        andnormal
                                                 and    normalcontrol
                                                                control(NC)
                                                                         (NC) tissues.
                                                                               tissues. Fungal
                                                                                         Fungalcomposition
                                                                                                 compositionininthe  ALGD
                                                                                                                   the ALGD tissues
                                                                                                                               tissueswaswascompared
                                                                                                                                               compared
                                        with the adjacent NC. (A) Fungal operational taxonomic units (OTUs) number in ALGD mucosa
                                     with the adjacent NC. (A) Fungal operational taxonomic units (OTUs) number in ALGD mucosa
                                        and NC in the colon. (B) Rarefaction analysis of sampling by observed Fungal OTU. (C) Principal
                                     and   NC in theanalysis
                                        coordinates     colon. (PCoA)
                                                                (B) Rarefaction
                                                                         based on analysis   of abundance
                                                                                   the relative sampling by    observed
                                                                                                            of Fungal    Fungal
                                                                                                                      OTUs  in ALGDOTU. and (C) Principal
                                                                                                                                              NC.  (D)
                                     coordinates
                                        Shannon, (E)  analysis (PCoA)
                                                         Simpson,         based
                                                                    and (F)  Chaoon1the   relative
                                                                                       index       abundance
                                                                                             between  ALGD of      Fungal
                                                                                                               mucosa      OTUs
                                                                                                                       and NC     inin  ALGD
                                                                                                                                      the          TheNC.
                                                                                                                                           colon.and
                                     (D)  Shannon, (E)
                                        ecologic           Simpson,
                                                   associations  of (G)and (F)  Chao
                                                                         Shannon,   (H)1 index  between
                                                                                         Simpson,  and (I)ALGD    mucosa and
                                                                                                           Chao 1 index  between NC in
                                                                                                                                    ALGD  theand
                                                                                                                                               colon.
                                                                                                                                                   NCThe
                                        groups.Each
                                     ecologic           dot represent
                                                 associations   of (G)one  subject; (H)
                                                                        Shannon,     gray area represents
                                                                                         Simpson,         95%
                                                                                                    and (I)     confidence
                                                                                                             Chao 1  indexinterval
                                                                                                                           between                line. NC
                                                                                                                                         best-fit and
                                                                                                                                     forALGD
                           Microorganisms 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                        8 of 16
                                     groups.Each dot represent one subject; gray area represents 95% confidence interval for best-fit line.
                                            We further analyzed the composition of fungal bacteria in ALGD and NC groups.
                                       The fungal community from the 40 participantsʹ mucosal samples was classified into ten
                                       phyla, 37 classes, 84 orders, 183 families, and 327 genera (Supplementary Table S2). At the
                                       phylum level, the intestinal fungi were dominated by Ascomycota (72.91%),
                                       Basidiomycota (17.61%), and Zygomycota (4.44%) (Figure 4A). When analyzed on the
                                       genera level, twenty-one genera, namely Alternaria, Malassezia, Microascus,
                                       Ascomycota_unclassified, Davidiella, Gibberella, Phialemonium, Actinomucor, Candida,
                                       Valsaceae_unclassified, Mortierella, Cladosporium, Phialocephala, Aspergillus, Cryptococcus,
                                       Talaromyces, Acremonium, Saccharomyces, Thermoascus, Lycoperdon, and Cyllamyces were
                                       identified above 1% on average (Figure 4B). However, no significant diﬀerences were
                                       found in the major fungal phyla and genera (Figure 4B).

                                    Figure 4. Cont.
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                                              8 of 14




                                Figure 4. Characterization   4. fungal
                                                     Figure of   Characterization
                                                                       distributionof in
                                                                                       fungal  distribution
                                                                                         patients  with     in  patients
                                                                                                         adenomas    withwith   adenomas
                                                                                                                           low-grade      with low-grade
                                                                                                                                       dysplasia
                                                     dysplasia (ALGD). Relative abundance of fungal phyla (A) and genera (B) in the ALGD and NC
                                (ALGD). Relative abundance of fungal phyla (A) and genera (B) in the ALGD nd NC groups.
                                                     groups. (C) Taxonomic representation of statistically and biologically consistent diﬀerences between
                                (C) Taxonomic    representation
                                                     the colonic of  statistically
                                                                 ALGD and           and (D)
                                                                            NC groups.    biologically   consistent
                                                                                              Histogram of the        differences
                                                                                                                 LDA scores  (log10)between
                                                                                                                                     computedthe
                                                                                                                                               for features
                                colonic ALGD and NC       groups. (D)
                                                     diﬀerentially       Histogram
                                                                   abundant in  colonicof  the and
                                                                                         ALGD   LDANC  scores  (log10) computed for features
                                                                                                         groups.
                                differentially abundant in colonic ALGD and NC groups.
                                                          LEfSe analysis was used to identify the specific fungal taxa associated with ALGD.
                                3.4. Correlation between   Intestinal
                                                     Compared           Bacterial
                                                                  with NC,   the and     Fungal
                                                                                  relative        Composition
                                                                                            abundance    of Helotiales, Leotiomycetes, and Basidiomycota
                                                     increased at the order, class, and phylum levels, respectively (Figure 4C,D). While the
                                      We evaluated the relationship between intestinal bacterial and fungal taxa in the
                                                     Verrucariales, Russulales, and Trichosporonales were decreased at the order level, the
                                ALGD and NC groups at the phylum and genus levels. At the phylum level, Firmicutes
                                                     Didymellaceae,      Pleosporales_Incertae_sedis,       Eurotiales_Incertae_sedis,     Verrucariaceae,
                                showed a significant    positive correlationEntolomataceae,
                                                     Sordariales_unclassified,    with Bacteroidetes       and a negative
                                                                                                  and Trichosporonaceae       correlation
                                                                                                                           were   decreasedwith
                                                                                                                                            at e family
                                Proteobacteria (Figure
                                                     level; 5A).   Basidiomycota
                                                              Strelitziana,             was negatively
                                                                              Thermomyces,                   correlated with Ascomycota
                                                                                                  Verrucariaceae_unclassified,      Nectria, Neonectria,
                                (Figure 5A). At theSordariales_unclassified,
                                                       genus level, we observed          a relationship
                                                                                  Entoloma,                 between
                                                                                              and Trichosporon     werethe   16 mainatbacteria
                                                                                                                          decreased      the genus level
                                (found in more than     50% of
                                                     (Figure      the samples and had a relative abundance >0.01) and 21 main
                                                              4C,D).
 Microorganisms 2023, 11, x FOR PEERfungal
                                     REVIEWgenera. The complex relationships between bacteria and fungi are illustrated
                                                                                                                    9 of 16
                                                                                                                         in
                                Figure 5B.             3.4. Correlation between Intestinal Bacterial and Fungal Composition
                                                             We evaluated the relationship between intestinal bacterial and fungal taxa in the
                                                       ALGD and NC groups at the phylum and genus levels. At the phylum level, Firmicutes
                                                       showed a significant positive correlation with Bacteroidetes and a negative correlation
                                                       with Proteobacteria (Figure 5A). Basidiomycota was negatively correlated with
                                                       Ascomycota (Figure 5A). At the genus level, we observed a relationship between the 16
                                                       main bacteria (found in more than 50% of the samples and had a relative abundance >0.01)
                                                       and 21 main fungal genera. The complex relationships between bacteria and fungi are
                                                       illustrated in Figure 5B.




                                 Figure 5. Inter- and intra-kingdom correlations between intestinal bacteria and fungi at phylum (A)
                                Figure 5. Inter- and intra-kingdom correlations between intestinal bacteria and fungi at phylum
                                 and genus (B) level. (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01).
                                (A) and genus (B) level. (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01).
                                3.5. Functional Analysis
                                     Bacterial functional analysis was conducted on colonic biopsy samples from the
                                ALGD and NC groups. Four hundred thirty-six pathways were identified in both groups,
                                four of which were significantly increased in the ALGD group (p < 0.05), including
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                                                               9 of 14




                                  3.5. Functional Analysis
                                                Bacterial functional analysis was conducted on colonic biopsy samples from the ALGD
                                       and NC groups. Four hundred thirty-six pathways were identified in both groups, four
                                       of which were significantly increased in the ALGD group (p < 0.05), including glycogen
                                       degradation II (eukaryotic), vanillin and vanillate degradation II, the super pathway of
                                       vanillin and vanillate degradation, and vanillin and vanillate degradation I. Therefore,
                                       these results suggest that alteration of bacterial function could be involved in the pathogen-
                                       esis of ALGD (Figure 6A). In addition, the fungal functional analysis was also conducted
                                       on samples from both groups. Eighty-eight pathways were identified in both groups,
                                       eight of which were found to be significantly decreased in the ALGD group (p < 0.05),
                                       including gondoate biosynthesis (anaerobic), stearate biosynthesis II (bacteria and plants),
                                       glucose and glucose-1-phosphate degradation, starch degradation V, glycogen degrada-
                                       tion I (bacterial), sucrose degradation III (sucrose invertase), L-tryptophan degradation to
                                       2-amino-3-carboxymuconate semialdehyde, and pantothenate and coenzyme A biosynthe-
                                       sis (Figure 6B). However, the octane oxidation pathway was increased in the 10ALGD
                         Microorganisms 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                       of 16
                                                                                                                                group
                                       compared with the NC (Figure 6B).




                                  Figure 6. Significant
                                                  Figure 6.metagenomic        differences
                                                            Significant metagenomic         were
                                                                                     diﬀerences    found
                                                                                                 were found in  bacterial
                                                                                                             in bacterial (A) (A)   and fungal
                                                                                                                              and fungal            (B) functional
                                                                                                                                          (B) functional
                                  analysis by analysis
                                               Phylogeneticby Phylogenetic   Investigation
                                                                  Investigation      of of   Communities by
                                                                                         Communities        by Reconstruction
                                                                                                                 Reconstruction   of Unobserved
                                                                                                                                        of         States
                                                                                                                                            Unobserved        States
                                                  (PICRUSt2), respectively, between the ALGN and NC groups. In addition, a significant diﬀerence
                                                respectively,
                                  (PICRUSt2), was                 between
                                                       detected by stamp      theusing
                                                                           v2.1.3  ALGN     and NC
                                                                                        White’s         groups.
                                                                                                non-parametric   t test addition,
                                                                                                                     In(p < 0.05). Thealeft figure
                                                                                                                                         significant
                                                                                                                                                   in thedifference
                                  was detected by picture
                                                     stampshows    the abundance
                                                               v2.1.3             ratio of non-parametric
                                                                        using White’s      diﬀerent functions int two
                                                                                                                    testgroups    of samples.
                                                                                                                          (p < 0.05).    The Theleftdots
                                                                                                                                                     figure in the
                                                  represent the proportion of diﬀerence in functional abundance within the 95% confidence interval.
                                  picture shows the   abundance       ratio  of different
                                                  The right value is the p-value.          functions    in two    groups     of samples.      The   dots  represent
                                  the proportion of difference in functional abundance within the 95% confidence interval. The right
                                                  4. Discussion
                                  value is the p-value.
                                                     Most CRCs arise from specific types of colonic polyps (adenomas) which form due
                                               to spontaneous mutations or DNA mismatch repair in the adenomatous polyposis coli
                                  4. Discussion
                                               pathway, which contains low-grade dysplasia [2,14]. Low-grade dysplasia is an early
                                       Most CRCs     arise from
                                               precancerous    changespecific   types
                                                                        and, if left     of colonic
                                                                                     untreated,        polyps
                                                                                                can develop    (adenomas)
                                                                                                            into high-grade      whichorform due
                                                                                                                              dysplasia
                                  to spontaneous mutations or DNA mismatch repair in the adenomatous clinical
                                               cancer.  Therefore,   proctocolectomy   is recommended    when  it is identified. In polyposis coli
                                               settings, adenomatous polyps are predictive tools for patients more prone to developing
                                  pathway, which
                                               CRC.
                                                     contains      low-grade       dysplasia     [2,14].  Low-grade       dysplasia     is an early
                                  precancerous change     and,
                                                     Thus, in thisif left we
                                                                   study, untreated,
                                                                             identified can   develop into
                                                                                        colorectal            high-grade
                                                                                                   adenoma-associated         dysplasia
                                                                                                                      microbiota in ALGDor cancer.
                                               patients and compared the microbiota in ALGD-associated mucosa to that of NCs. In
                                               previous studies, the microbiota profile diﬀerences were less significant than those
                                               reported between the CRC and NC groups [15]. However, there were still some
                                               diﬀerences between the ALGD and NC groups. First, we evaluated bacterial colonization
                                               in ALGD-associated mucosa and found that the OTU number was slightly lower than that
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                            10 of 14




                                Therefore, proctocolectomy is recommended when it is identified. In clinical settings,
                                adenomatous polyps are predictive tools for patients more prone to developing CRC.
                                      Thus, in this study, we identified colorectal adenoma-associated microbiota in ALGD
                                patients and compared the microbiota in ALGD-associated mucosa to that of NCs. In
                                previous studies, the microbiota profile differences were less significant than those reported
                                between the CRC and NC groups [15]. However, there were still some differences between
                                the ALGD and NC groups. First, we evaluated bacterial colonization in ALGD-associated
                                mucosa and found that the OTU number was slightly lower than that in the NC. Species
                                richness and community diversity were not markedly different between the ALGD and NC
                                groups. This corroborated a study by Peter et al. [16], which suggests that the microbial
                                species richness was significantly different only in advanced conventional adenoma cases.
                                      Interestingly, the Chao1, Simpson, and Shannon indices showed a positive association
                                between ALGD and NC tissues, exhibiting a close relationship of bacterial colonization
                                between ALGD and adjacent normal colorectal tissue. We further studied the bacterial
                                composition in the colon at the phylum level. Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes,
                                and Fusobacteria were the four main phyla in the colonic mucosa. Proteobacteria was the
                                most dominant phylum, outnumbering the other three.
                                      Next, we studied the different bacterial compositions in the colon at the different
                                taxa levels. Ten taxa, including uncultured Pseudomonas spp., Rhodobacterales, Sphingobium,
                                Rhodobacteraceae, Paracoccus, Thermus, Thermaceae, and Thermus unclassified species, and
                                Thermales order species were increased in ALGD group. In comparison, two taxa (an
                                uncultured_Abiotrophia_species and Abiotrophia genus) were decreased in the ALGD group
                                compared with NC. Among the twelve taxa, several taxa colonize the human gut. Wheatley
                                et al. [17]. reported that a Pseudomonas species (P. aeruginosa) can translocate from the gut to
                                the lungs and cause tissue damage during lung infection with greater pro-inflammatory
                                gene expression. Mei et al. [18]. reported that Sphingobium was more abundant in the
                                duodenal mucosa of patients with pancreatic cancer than in the duodenal microbiotas of
                                healthy controls. As for Abiotrophia, one study reported its lower abundance in colonic
                                mucosal tissue in high-fat-diet subjects [19], and another study reported that it is more
                                abundant in the tongue coating microbiome in patients with gastric cancer [20]. Previous
                                studies have demonstrated the pro-inflammatory function of these bacterial taxa in human
                                disorders; however, the relationship between these bacterial taxa and ALGD development
                                has not been reported.
                                      We further investigated fungal colonization in mucosa-associated with ALGD and
                                found that the number of observed fungal OTUs was slightly lower than in the NC group.
                                The principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) results showed that the fungal communities in
                                ALGD-mucosa were more separated than the NC-mucosa. We observed a decrease in
                                species richness in the ALGD group, which is consistent with the decreased Chao1 index
                                compared to the NC group. However, the two groups had no significant differences in
                                the fungal community diversity (Simpson and Shannon indices). Furthermore, unlike the
                                bacterial analysis, we found no significant association between ALGD and NC regarding
                                Chao1, Simpson, and Shannon indices.
                                      In this study, we studied the fungal composition in the colon at the phylum level.
                                Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, and Zygomycota were the three predominant phyla in the
                                colonic mucosa, with Ascomycota being the most dominant phylum, outnumbering the
                                other two. However, it is essential to note that about 5% of fungi could not be identified at
                                the phylum level, indicating a significant gap in our knowledge about fungi. Therefore,
                                we further examined the fungal composition at different taxonomic levels. Twenty-two
                                taxa, including Didymella, Didymellaceae, Pleosporales Incertae sedis, Strelitziana, Thermomyces,
                                Eurotiales Incertae sedis, Verrucariaceae unclassified, Verrucariaceae, Verrucariales, Nectria,
                                Neonectria, Sordariales unclassified, Sordariales unclassified, Entoloma, Entolomataceae, Russu-
                                lales, Trichosporon, Trichosporonaceae, and Trichosporonales were decreased in the NC group
                                compared with that in the ALGD group. However, the number of Helotiales, Leotiomycetes,
                                and Basidiomycota increased in the ALGD group.
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                            11 of 14




                                      Although previous data did not show a direct relationship between most of the
                                fungi mentioned above and the development of ALGD, some fungi have been associated
                                with inflammation and metabolic pathways closely linked to colorectal cancer (CRC).
                                For example, the relative abundance of the fungal genus Thermomyces has been found to
                                increase in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples from patients with chronic obstructive
                                pulmonary disease (COPD), which is also associated with an increased risk of CRC [21].
                                Feng et al. [22]. reported that Trichosporon asahii Y2 could increase lipase activity in the
                                digestive tract and promote obesity and hyperlipidemia. Andrade et al. [23]. reported
                                that T. asahii and T. mucoides could produce glucuronoxylomannan, which participates
                                in several immunoregulatory mechanisms and causes inflammation. Leotiomycetes and
                                Helotiales were decreased in newly diagnosed treatment-naïve children with Crohn’s disease
                                compared with healthy controls, although the difference was not statistically significant [24].
                                Thermomyces are strongly associated with metabolic disturbances and weight gain [25].
                                      The interactions between bacteria and fungi have been overlooked in previous studies.
                                In this study, we observed relationships between the inter- and intra-kingdoms of bacteria
                                and fungi. Our study has observed relationships between these two kingdoms at inter- and
                                intra-kingdom levels. We found that, at the phylum level, there was a negative association
                                between Proteobacteria and both Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, as well as a negative association
                                between Ascomycota and Basidiomycota in the LAGD group. These findings are consistent
                                with previous studies that have reported an increase in the Ascomycota/Basidiomycota ra-
                                tio in colon polyps and CRC patients compared to healthy controls [26]. We examined
                                associations between bacterial and fungal taxa at the genus level, focusing on 16 main
                                bacterial genera and 26 fungal genera. Previous research has linked several taxa to intestinal
                                inflammation and/or tumor formation. Chen et al. [27]. The abundance of Clostridium,
                                Roseburia, and Eubacterium spp.—genera involved in butyrate fermentation—was lower in
                                the colorectal adenoma group compared to the healthy control group.
                                      In contrast, Enterococcus, Streptococcus spp., and Proteobacteria phyla were enriched
                                in the adenoma group. Keisuke et al. [28]. reported that patients with colorectal adenoma
                                had higher levels of Fusobacterium, Parvimonas, and Atopobium than healthy individuals.
                                Fusobacterium spp. was the most differentially abundant bacterial taxon in patients with
                                colorectal adenoma, while the microbiome of healthy individuals had a higher abundance
                                of Lachnobacterium, Salmonella, and Moraxellaceae. In another study by Chattopadhyay
                                et al. [29], patients with CRC had higher levels of Escherichia coli, E. faecalis, F. nucleatum,
                                and Streptococcus gallolyticus. At the same time, Bifidobacterium, Clostridium, Faecalibacterium,
                                and Roseburia were less abundant. Malasseziomycetes (fungal class) was enriched in CRC
                                patients, while Saccharomycetes (including Lypomyces starkeyi and Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
                                and Pneumocystidomycetes were lower [26].
                                      In this study, we found that Fusobacterium, which may play a role in the etiology of CRC
                                due to its coaggregation ability, was significantly negatively associated with Prevotella 9 and
                                Acinetobacter and was positively associated with Themoascus. Faecalibacterium, a well-known
                                butyrate-producing bacteria that can protect the intestinal epithelial cells [30,31], was signif-
                                icantly positively associated with Bacteroides, Sutterella, Roseuria, and Ruminococcus torques
                                9, and negatively associated with Citrobacter. Roseburia, which can improve intestinal biodi-
                                versity, glucose tolerance, and rejuvenate colon cells [32], was positively associated with
                                Bacteroides, Faecalibacterium, Sutterella, and Ruminococcus torques and negatively associated
                                with Citrobacter. Saccharomycetes, which were reported to be decreased in patients with
                                CRC, were positively associated with Prevotella, Candida, and Lycoperdon and negatively
                                associated with Escherichia-Shigella and Cladosporium. Candida, enriched in gastrointestinal
                                tumor samples and associated with inflammation and tumorigenesis [33], was positively
                                associated with Haemophilus, Actinobacillus, Prevotella, Phialocephala, Saccharomyces, and
                                Lycoperdon, and negatively associated with Escherichia-Shigella.
                                      The functional prediction analysis provided insights into how the intestinal microbiota
                                affects the initiation and development of ALGD. Using PICRUSt2, it was found that the
                                vanillin and vanillate degradation pathways and the glycogen degradation pathways
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                          12 of 14




                                were increased in the ALGD group compared to the NC group. Vanillin, vanillic acid,
                                and vanillyl alcohol have anti-inflammatory effects and can act on oxidative stress [34],
                                which may contribute to the development of ALGD. In addition, glycogen degradation
                                is a harmful pathway that can cause CRC, which was also increased in the ALGD group
                                compared with the NC group [35], illustrating intestinal bacteria involved in the function
                                of this pathway.
                                      When the intestinal fungi were analyzed using PICRUSt2, it was found that the glu-
                                cose and glucose-1-phosphate degradation, glycogen degradation I (bacterial), gondoate
                                biosynthesis (anaerobic), L-tryptophan degradation to 2-amino-3-carboxymuconate semi-
                                aldehyde, pantothenate and coenzyme A biosynthesis I, starch degradation V, stearate
                                biosynthesis II (bacteria and plants), and sucrose degradation III (sucrose invertase) path-
                                ways were decreased in the ALGD group compared to the NC group. On the other hand,
                                octane oxidation was increased in the ALGD group. While the effects of these pathways
                                in the initiation and development of ALGD/CRC have not been reported, studies have
                                shown that the 2-amino-3-carboxymuconate semi-aldehyde degraded from L-tryptophan
                                is a carcinogen that can cause tumor initiation [36]. Additionally, stearate can act as an
                                energy source for the growth of specific cancer cells. Stearate biosynthesis II is reported to
                                be involved in the development of certain types of cancer [37]. Although there is currently
                                no direct link between sucrose degradation and cancer, research suggests that diets high in
                                sugar and refined carbohydrates can lead to inflammation [38], which may increase the risk
                                of certain types of cancer [39]. Further studies are needed to determine the precise functions
                                of the intestinal microbiota in causing intestinal dysplasia and/or cancer development,
                                especially for the pathways mentioned above that have not been previously reported.
                                      This study demonstrated that ALGD patients have a characteristic gut microbial com-
                                position. However, there were some limitations to this study. First, the mucosal microbiota
                                in the intestinal epithelium and the luminal microbiota in the stool are markedly different
                                ecosystems, which may have had different effects on the initiation and development of
                                ALGD/CRC. Therefore, the comparison between the microbiota in both ecosystems is
                                required in future studies. Second, owing to the limitations of the current microbiological
                                detection methods and microbiota database (particularly the fungal database), we could
                                not annotate some of the bacteria and fungi at the species level. Third, ALGD is the pre-
                                cancerous condition of CRC. Thus, the microecological changes in the ALGD group are
                                not as apparent as those seen in the CRC group. Therefore, a study with a larger sample
                                size and a more comprehensively designed experimental protocol, which can observe
                                the microecological changes in the entire process of polyp-adenoma-colorectal carcinoma,
                                is required.
                                      Intestinal mucosal microbiota, including bacteria and fungi, has been shown to play
                                a critical role in the initiation and development of colorectal cancer. In addition, recent
                                studies suggest that the mucosal microbiota may be a more important characteristic of
                                early-onset colorectal cancer than luminal microbiomes [40]. These findings indicate that
                                the mucosal microbiota metabolic pathways related could serve as a potential marker for
                                the diagnosis and treatment of colorectal adenoma/carcinoma.
                                      Correlation and functional prediction analyses have provided insights into the complex
                                direct and/or indirect pathways through which the intestinal microbiome affects host gut
                                inflammation and/or metabolic pathways [41]; Future studies should focus on identifying
                                specific microorganisms or metabolites with carcinogenic or cancer-suppressing effects,
                                as well as the inter- and intra-kingdom interactions between intestinal bacteria and fungi
                                that contribute to the development of intestinal dysplasia and/or cancer. Furthermore, we
                                need to expand our knowledge of the effects of the intestinal microbiota on host immune
                                and metabolic systems, which could significantly influence the development of colorectal
                                adenoma/carcinoma. By comprehending the mechanisms that underlie the relationship
                                between the microbiota and host factors, we can devise new strategies for preventing and
                                treating colorectal cancer.
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                                           13 of 14




                                   Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
                                   //www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/microorganisms11051327/s1; Figure S1: Flowchart of participant
                                   selection, Table S1: Bacteria LEfSe_Group_P_vs_N, Table S2: Fungi LEfSe_Group_P_vs_N.
                                   Author Contributions: Conceptualization: X.Q.; Methodology: X.Q. and D.H.; Data analysis and
                                   curation: M.Z., Y.Y. and X.Q.; Formal analysis: D.H. and M.Z.; Writing—original draft: X.Q. and
                                   D.H. Writing—review & editing: X.Q. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
                                   the manuscript.
                                    Funding: This research received no external funding.
                                    Data Availability Statement: Data from this study are available from the corresponding author upon
                                    reasonable request.
                                    Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Ma, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Qu, R.; Zhou, X.; Sun, L.; Wang, K.; Jiang, C.; Zhang, Z.; Fu, W. Promotion of Deoxycholic Acid Effect on
      Colonic Cancer Cell Lines In Vitro by Altering the Mucosal Microbiota. Microorganisms 2022, 10, 2486. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Calderwood, A.H.; Lasser, K.E.; Roy, H.K. Colon adenoma features and their impact on risk of future advanced adenomas and
      colorectal cancer. World J. Gastrointest Oncol. 2016, 8, 826–834. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.    Zhang, Y.; Yu, X.; Yu, E.; Wang, N.; Cai, Q.; Shuai, Q.; Yan, F.; Jiang, L.; Wang, H.; Liu, J.; et al. Changes in gut microbiota and
      plasma inflammatory factors across the stages of colorectal tumorigenesis: A case-control study. BMC Microbiol. 2018, 18, 92.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.    Mizutani, S.; Yamada, T.; Yachida, S. Significance of the gut microbiome in multistep colorectal carcinogenesis. Cancer Sci. 2020,
      111, 766–773. [CrossRef]
5.    Vallianou, N.; Kounatidis, D.; Christodoulatos, G.S.; Panagopoulos, F.; Karampela, I.; Dalamaga, M. Mycobiome and Cancer:
      What Is the Evidence? Cancers 2021, 13, 3149. [CrossRef]
6.    Klymiuk, I.; Singer, G.; Castellani, C.; Trajanoski, S.; Obermuller, B.; Till, H. Characterization of the Luminal and Mucosa-
      Associated Microbiome along the Gastrointestinal Tract: Results from Surgically Treated Preterm Infants and a Murine Model.
      Nutrients 2021, 13, 1030. [CrossRef]
7.    Qiu, X.; Ma, J.; Jiao, C.; Mao, X.; Zhao, X.; Lu, M.; Wang, K.; Zhang, H. Alterations in the mucosa-associated fungal microbiota in
      patients with ulcerative colitis. Oncotarget 2017, 8, 107577–107588. [CrossRef]
8.    Gubatan, J.; Boye, T.L.; Temby, M.; Sojwal, R.S.; Holman, D.R.; Sinha, S.R.; Rogalla, S.R.; Nielsen, O.H. Gut Microbiome in
      Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Role in Pathogenesis, Dietary Modulation, and Colitis-Associated Colon Cancer. Microorganisms
      2022, 10, 1371. [CrossRef]
9.    Paterson, M.J.; Oh, S.; Underhill, D.M. Host-microbe interactions: Commensal fungi in the gut. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2017, 40,
      131–137. [CrossRef]
10.   Eckburg, P.B.; Bik, E.M.; Bernstein, C.N.; Purdom, E.; Dethlefsen, L.; Sargent, M.; Gill, S.R.; Nelson, K.E.; Relman, D.A. Diversity
      of the human intestinal microbial flora. Science 2005, 308, 1635–1638. [CrossRef]
11.   Yang, J.; Howe, A.; Lee, J.; Yoo, K.; Park, J. An Improved Approach to Identify Bacterial Pathogens to Human in Environmental
      Metagenome. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2020, 30, 1335–1342. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Qiu, X.; Zhao, X.; Cui, X.; Mao, X.; Tang, N.; Jiao, C.; Wang, D.; Zhang, Y.; Ye, Z.; Zhang, H. Characterization of fungal and
      bacterial dysbiosis in young adult Chinese patients with Crohn’s disease. Ther. Adv. Gastroenterol. 2020, 13, 1756284820971202.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   Segata, N.; Izard, J.; Waldron, L.; Gevers, D.; Miropolsky, L.; Garrett, W.S.; Huttenhower, C. Metagenomic biomarker discovery
      and explanation. Genome Biol. 2011, 12, R60. [CrossRef]
14.   Sobhani, I. DNA Methylation Is a Main Key for Bacteria-Related Colon Carcinogenesis. Microorganisms 2021, 9, 2574. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
15.   Garrett, W.S. The gut microbiota and colon cancer. Science 2019, 364, 1133–1135. [CrossRef]
16.   Peters, B.A.; Dominianni, C.; Shapiro, J.A.; Church, T.R.; Wu, J.; Miller, G.; Yuen, E.; Freiman, H.; Lustbader, I.; Salik, J.; et al. The
      gut microbiota in conventional and serrated precursors of colorectal cancer. Microbiome 2016, 4, 69. [CrossRef]
17.   Wheatley, R.M.; Caballero, J.D.; van der Schalk, T.E.; De Winter, F.H.R.; Shaw, L.P.; Kapel, N.; Recanatini, C.; Timbermont, L.;
      Kluytmans, J.; Esser, M.; et al. Gut to lung translocation and antibiotic mediated selection shape the dynamics of Pseudomonas
      aeruginosa in an ICU patient. Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 6523. [CrossRef]
18.   Mei, Q.X.; Huang, C.L.; Luo, S.Z.; Zhang, X.M.; Zeng, Y.; Lu, Y.Y. Characterization of the duodenal bacterial microbiota in patients
      with pancreatic head cancer vs. healthy controls. Pancreatology 2018, 18, 438–445. [CrossRef]
19.   Qian, L.; Gao, R.; Hong, L.; Pan, C.; Li, H.; Huang, J.; Qin, H. Association analysis of dietary habits with gut microbiota of a native
      Chinese community. Exp. Ther. Med. 2018, 16, 856–866. [CrossRef]
20.   Wu, J.; Xu, S.; Xiang, C.; Cao, Q.; Li, Q.; Huang, J.; Shi, L.; Zhang, J.; Zhan, Z. Tongue Coating Microbiota Community and Risk
      Effect on Gastric Cancer. J. Cancer 2018, 9, 4039–4048. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1327                                                                                                             14 of 14




21.   Wu, X.; Wei, X.; Li, X.; Deng, J.; Zhang, J. Diversity of Fungi and Bacteria in Bronchoalveolar Lavage Fluid during Development
      of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. Jpn. J. Infect. Dis. 2022, 75, 560–568. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.   Feng, L.; Deng, Y.; Song, S.; Sun, Y.; Cui, J.; Ma, X.; Jin, L.; Wang, Y.; James, T.D.; Wang, C. Visual Identification of Trichosporon
      asahii, a Gut Yeast Associated with Obesity, Using an Enzymatic NIR Fluorescent Probe. Anal. Chem. 2022, 94, 11216–11223.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.   de Andrade, I.B.; Almeida, M.A.; Figueiredo-Carvalho, M.H.G.; Coelho, R.A.; Chaves, A.; Frases, S.; Zancope-Oliveira, R.M.;
      Brito-Santos, F.; Almeida-Paes, R. Production of Secreted Carbohydrates that Present Immunologic Similarities with the Crypto-
      coccus Glucuronoxylomannan by Members of the Trichosporonaceae Family: A Comparative Study among Species of Clinical
      Interest. Mycopathologia 2021, 186, 377–385. [CrossRef]
24.   El Mouzan, M.; Wang, F.; Al Mofarreh, M.; Menon, R.; Al Barrag, A.; Korolev, K.S.; Al Sarkhy, A.; Al Asmi, M.; Hamed, Y.;
      Saeed, A.; et al. Fungal Microbiota Profile in Newly Diagnosed Treatment-naive Children with Crohn’s Disease. J. Crohns Colitis
      2017, 11, 586–592. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.   Mims, T.S.; Abdallah, Q.A.; Stewart, J.D.; Watts, S.P.; White, C.T.; Rousselle, T.V.; Gosain, A.; Bajwa, A.; Han, J.C.; Willis, K.A.;
      et al. The gut mycobiome of healthy mice is shaped by the environment and correlates with metabolic outcomes in response to
      diet. Commun. Biol. 2021, 4, 281. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.   Kazmierczak-Siedlecka, K.; Dvorak, A.; Folwarski, M.; Daca, A.; Przewlocka, K.; Makarewicz, W. Fungal Gut Microbiota Dysbiosis
      and Its Role in Colorectal, Oral, and Pancreatic Carcinogenesis. Cancers 2020, 12, 1326. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.   Chen, H.M.; Yu, Y.N.; Wang, J.L.; Lin, Y.W.; Kong, X.; Yang, C.Q.; Yang, L.; Liu, Z.J.; Yuan, Y.Z.; Liu, F.; et al. Decreased dietary
      fiber intake and structural alteration of gut microbiota in patients with advanced colorectal adenoma. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2013, 97,
      1044–1052. [CrossRef]
28.   Saito, K.; Koido, S.; Odamaki, T.; Kajihara, M.; Kato, K.; Horiuchi, S.; Adachi, S.; Arakawa, H.; Yoshida, S.; Akasu, T.; et al.
      Metagenomic analyses of the gut microbiota associated with colorectal adenoma. PLoS ONE 2019, 14, e0212406. [CrossRef]
29.   Chattopadhyay, I.; Dhar, R.; Pethusamy, K.; Seethy, A.; Srivastava, T.; Sah, R.; Sharma, J.; Karmakar, S. Exploring the Role of Gut
      Microbiome in Colon Cancer. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2021, 193, 1780–1799. [CrossRef]
30.   Mao, X.; Ma, J.; Jiao, C.; Tang, N.; Zhao, X.; Wang, D.; Zhang, Y.; Ye, Z.; Xu, C.; Jiang, J.; et al. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii
      Attenuates DSS-Induced Colitis by Inhibiting the Colonization and Pathogenicity of Candida albicans. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2021,
      65, e2100433. [CrossRef]
31.   Qiu, X.; Zhang, M.; Yang, X.; Hong, N.; Yu, C. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii upregulates regulatory T cells and anti-inflammatory
      cytokines in treating TNBS-induced colitis. J. Crohns Colitis 2013, 7, e558–e568. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.   Tamanai-Shacoori, Z.; Smida, I.; Bousarghin, L.; Loreal, O.; Meuric, V.; Fong, S.B.; Bonnaure-Mallet, M.; Jolivet-Gougeon, A.
      Roseburia spp.: A marker of health? Future Microbiol. 2017, 12, 157–170. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.   Zhu, Y.; Shi, T.; Lu, X.; Xu, Z.; Qu, J.; Zhang, Z.; Shi, G.; Shen, S.; Hou, Y.; Chen, Y.; et al. Fungal-induced glycolysis in macrophages
      promotes colon cancer by enhancing innate lymphoid cell secretion of IL-22. EMBO J. 2021, 40, e105320. [CrossRef]
34.   Bezerra-Filho, C.S.M.; Barboza, J.N.; Souza, M.T.S.; Sabry, P.; Ismail, N.S.M.; de Sousa, D.P. Therapeutic Potential of Vanillin and
      its Main Metabolites to Regulate the Inflammatory Response and Oxidative Stress. Mini Rev. Med. Chem. 2019, 19, 1681–1693.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.   Huh, J.W.; Kim, M.J.; Kim, J.; Lee, H.G.; Ryoo, S.B.; Ku, J.L.; Jeong, S.Y.; Park, K.J.; Kim, D.; Kim, J.F.; et al. Enterotypical Prevotella
      and three novel bacterial biomarkers in preoperative stool predict the clinical outcome of colorectal cancer. Microbiome 2022, 10,
      203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.   Modoux, M.; Rolhion, N.; Mani, S.; Sokol, H. Tryptophan metabolism as a pharmacological target. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 2021, 42,
      60–73. [CrossRef]
37.   Chu, Q.; Liu, P.; Song, Y.; Yang, R.; An, J.; Zhai, X.; Niu, J.; Yang, C.; Li, B. Stearate-derived very long-chain fatty acids are
      indispensable to tumor growth. EMBO J. 2023, 42, e111268. [CrossRef]
38.   Rinninella, E.; Tohumcu, E.; Raoul, P.; Fiorani, M.; Cintoni, M.; Mele, M.C.; Cammarota, G.; Gasbarrini, A.; Ianiro, G. The role of
      diet in shaping human gut microbiota. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Gastroenterol. 2023, 63, 101828. [CrossRef]
39.   Sharma, N.K.; Sarode, S.C.; Sarode, G.S.; Patil, S.; Pal, J.K. Dietary Choices Modulate Colorectal Cancer Stem Cells: A Role of FXR
      Nuclear Receptor. Nutr. Cancer 2021, 73, 1253–1260. [CrossRef]
40.   Kim, D.; Jung, J.Y.; Oh, H.S.; Jee, S.R.; Park, S.J.; Lee, S.H.; Yoon, J.S.; Yu, S.J.; Yoon, I.C.; Lee, H.S. Comparison of sampling
      methods in assessing the microbiome from patients with ulcerative colitis. BMC Gastroenterol. 2021, 21, 396. [CrossRef]
41.   Fang, C.Y.; Chen, J.S.; Hsu, B.M.; Hussain, B.; Rathod, J.; Lee, K.H. Colorectal Cancer Stage-Specific Fecal Bacterial Community
      Fingerprinting of the Taiwanese Population and Underpinning of Potential Taxonomic Biomarkers. Microorganisms 2021, 9, 1548.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
