              biology
Article
Colorectal Cancer Study of Austria (CORSA):
A Population-Based Multicenter Study
Andrea Gsur 1, * , Andreas Baierl 2                   and Stefanie Brezina 1

                                           1   Institute of Cancer Research, Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria;
                                               stefanie.brezina@meduniwien.ac.at
                                           2   Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of Vienna, 1010 Vienna, Austria;
                                               andreas.baierl@univie.ac.at
                                           *   Correspondence: andrea.gsur@meduniwien.ac.at; Tel.: +43-(0)1-40160-57541


                                           Simple Summary: The Colorectal cancer Study of Austria (CORSA), an ongoing multicenter prospec-
                                           tive case-control study, was initiated to discover prognostic as well as diagnostic biomarkers
                                           for colorectal cancer (CRC) risk prediction mainly based on OMICS research, such as genomics,
                                           metabolomics, and metagenomics centered at the Institute of Cancer Research at the Medical Uni-
                                           versity of Vienna; recruitment for CORSA started in 2003. Until now, we have generated genomics
                                           data, untargeted and targeted metabolomics data, folate-dependent one-carbon metabolism data,
                                           and leukocyte telomere length data using the CORSA biobank. The generated data, the collection of
                                           biological samples (genomic DNA, plasma, fecal samples) and the comprehensive CORSA database
                                           represents a valuable resource for ongoing and future national and international cooperation projects
                                           on CRC research.

                                           Abstract: The Colorectal cancer Study of Austria (CORSA) is comprised more than 13,500 newly
                                           diagnosed colorectal cancer (CRC) patients, patients with high- and low-risk adenomas as well as
                                 population-based controls. The recruitment for the CORSA biobank is performed in close cooperation
         
                                           with the invited two-stage CRC screening project “Burgenland PREvention trial of colorectal Disease
Citation: Gsur, A.; Baierl, A.; Brezina,   with ImmunologiCal Testing” (B-PREDICT). Annually, more than 150,000 inhabitants of the Austrian
S. Colorectal Cancer Study of Austria      federal state Burgenland aged between 40 and 80 are invited to participate using FIT-tests as an initial
(CORSA): A Population-Based
                                           screening. FIT-positive tested participants are offered a diagnostic colonoscopy and are asked to take
Multicenter Study. Biology 2021, 10,
                                           part in CORSA, sign a written informed consent, complete questionnaires concerning dietary and
722. https://doi.org/10.3390/
                                           lifestyle habits and provide an ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) blood sample as well as a
biology10080722
                                           stool sample. Additional CRC cases have been recruited at four hospitals in Vienna and a hospital in
Received: 28 June 2021
                                           lower Austria. A major strength of CORSA is the population-based controls who are FIT-positive
Accepted: 26 July 2021                     and colonoscopy-confirmed to be free of polyps and/or CRC.
Published: 28 July 2021
                                           Keywords: colorectal cancer; biomarker; genomics; proteomics; metagenomics; screening; biobank
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affil-
iations.                                   1. Introduction
                                                 Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the fourth most common cancer and the third highest cause
                                           of cancer-related deaths in Europe, thereby representing a severe public health problem [1].
                                           In Austria, the CRC incidence rate is observed in the lower third within the European
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.          Union with about 49.2 per 100,000 inhabitants (Statistics Austria, 2017). CRC is a complex
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.         disease with both genetic and lifestyle factors contributing to individual risk of CRC [2].
This article is an open access article     Early detection of CRC is an important issue since the stage at diagnosis remains the
distributed under the terms and            most important prognostic factor for CRC. The 5-year survival rate is about 90% for those
conditions of the Creative Commons         patients diagnosed at an early stage but decreases to 10% for advanced or metastasized
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://      cancer [3]. The majority of sporadic CRCs develop from normal epithelium through sequen-
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/           tially worsening degrees of adenomatous dysplasia, known as the adenoma-carcinoma
4.0/).




Biology 2021, 10, 722. https://doi.org/10.3390/biology10080722                                                 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/biology
Biology 2021, 10, 722                                                                                          2 of 12




                        sequence [4]. Due to the slow progression of CRC, there is a window of opportunity of
                        about ten years for prevention and intervention.
                             Screening programs have the potential to detect early precancerous lesions and per-
                        form endoscopic removal of adenomas, thereby contributing to the reduction of CRC inci-
                        dence and mortality [5]. Therefore, population-wide screening programs are recommended
                        in several European countries. Many CRC screening programs utilize a two-stage process
                        wherein patients testing positive on a fecal occult test are followed up by colonoscopy.
                        Nowadays, the preferred approach in testing for occult blood in feces used for CRC screen-
                        ing programs is the fecal immunochemical test (FIT), despite its relatively low specificity
                        and sensitivity. Moreover, FIT tests can detect only a small percentage of non-advanced
                        colorectal adenomas [6].
                             In Austria, the organization of screening programs is not regulated nationwide; it is a
                        matter of the federal states. To date, only two invited screening programs are performed
                        in Austria, in the federal states Vorarlberg and Burgenland. In Vorarlberg, a colonoscopy-
                        based screening program is offered to the insured population older than 50 years since
                        2007. In Burgenland, the screening program “Burgenland Prevention Trial of Colorectal
                        Cancer Disease with Immunological Testing” (BPREDICT), initiated in 2003, is a two-
                        stage invited screening program for individuals aged between 40 and 80 using FIT as
                        the initial screening. Participants with a positive FIT were invited for further diagnostic
                        work-up such as a diagnostic colonoscopy. These participants were asked to take part
                        in the “Colorectal Cancer Study of Austria” (CORSA), sign a written informed consent,
                        complete questionnaires, and provide an ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) blood
                        sample as well as a stool sample for the CORSA biobank. In cooperation with B-PREDICT,
                        several hospitals in Vienna and the Hospital Wiener Neustadt, we have established the
                        CORSA biobank, which currently comprises more than 13,500 participants. From each
                        participant, genomic DNA and plasma samples are stored at −80 ◦ C. Two years ago, we
                        also started recruitment of stool samples within the CRC screening program B-PREDICT.
                             The recruitment of participants for the ongoing CORSA started over 18 years ago at
                        the Medical University of Vienna, Austria. The initial motivation of CORSA was to identify
                        genetic risk variants that modify individual predisposition to CRC. At the beginning, the
                        aim was the identification of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) as well as tandem
                        repeat minisatellites and their association with CRC risk in a case-control study design [7].
                        With the progress in molecular biologically methods, we have focused on high-throughput
                        OMICS-based projects, in particular, genomics, metabolomics and metagenomics. We
                        conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) for sporadic CRC and untargeted
                        as well as targeted metabolomics profiling. The most recent CORSA project aims at the
                        identification of diagnostic signatures along the colorectal adenoma-carcinoma sequence
                        analyzing fecal samples via gut metagenomics. Altogether, CORSA aims to discover and
                        validate prognostic as well as diagnostic biomarkers for CRC risk prediction nowadays
                        based mainly on OMICS research.
                             The aim of CORSA is to identify new robust diagnostic biomarkers for advanced
                        adenomas and early-stage CRC by using state-of-the-art OMICS technologies such as
                        metabolomics, proteomics, and metagenomics in order to improve the identification of
                        patients at higher CRC risk.

                        2. Materials and Methods
                        2.1. Participant Recruitment
                             CORSA is an ongoing population case-control study of women and men recruiting
                        newly diagnosed CRC patients (colon, rectum or rectosigmoid cancer (ICD-10 C18-20),
                        histopathologically confirmed invasive cancer of any stage), high-/low-risk adenomas
                        and population-based colonoscopy-negative controls, with an age range between 30 and
                        90 years. Blood and fecal samples, dietary/lifestyle questionnaires, and anthropomet-
                        rics/demographics were obtained from each participant.
           90 years. Blood and fecal samples, dietary/lifestyle questionnaires, and anthropomet‐
Biology 2021, 10, 722                                                                                                    3 of 12
           rics/demographics were obtained from each participant.
                Since 2003, more than 13,500 participants have been recruited across nine sites in
           Austria. The multicenter recruitment within CORSA follows standardized protocols,
           resulting in consistentSince 2003,
                                     data     moreall
                                            from     than  13,500 participants
                                                         recruitment      sites.have  beensites
                                                                                  These     recruited acrossthe
                                                                                                  include        sites in Aus-
                                                                                                             nineMedical
                            tria. The multicenter recruitment within CORSA follows standardized protocols, resulting
           University of Vienna    (Department
                            in consistent  data fromof allSurgery),
                                                          recruitmentthree     further
                                                                       sites. These  siteshospitals
                                                                                           include thein  Vienna
                                                                                                       Medical      (Sozi‐ of
                                                                                                                University
           almedizinisches Vienna
                            Zentrum Süd,       Hospital
                                     (Department            Rudolfstiftung
                                                    of Surgery), three   furtherand    Hospital
                                                                                  hospitals         Elisabeth),
                                                                                             in Vienna           and the
                                                                                                        (Sozialmedizinisches
           Hospital Wiener Neustadt in Lower Austria. Furthermore, the recruitment for CORSA
                            Zentrum    Süd,  Hospital   Rudolfstiftung  and   Hospital  Elisabeth), and  the Hospital Wiener
           was performed in Neustadt
                                four in   Lower in
                                       hospitals  Austria.   Furthermore, the
                                                         Burgenland              recruitment
                                                                           (Hospital           for CORSA
                                                                                        Kittsee,    Hospitalwas Oberpul‐
                                                                                                                performed in
                            four hospitals in Burgenland (Hospital Kittsee, Hospital Oberpullendof, Hospital Ober-
           lendof, Hospital Oberwart, Hospital Güssing) within the population‐based screening
                            wart, Hospital Güssing) within the population-based screening program “Burgenland
           program “Burgenland      PREvention
                            PREvention                Trial ofcancer
                                          Trial of colorectal    colorectal
                                                                      DIseasecancer      DIsease with
                                                                               with ImmunologiCal          Immunologi‐
                                                                                                       Testing” (B-PREDICT)
           Cal Testing” (B‐PREDICT)
                            (Figure 1). (Figure 1).




      Figure       1. sites
             1. Study
           Figure     Study of CORSA
                               sites ofrecruitment   in Vienna, Burgenland,
                                         CORSA recruitment         in Vienna, and lower  Austria. Since
                                                                                  Burgenland,      and 2003, more
                                                                                                         lower     than 13,500
                                                                                                                Austria.       partici-
                                                                                                                           Since  2003,
      pantsmore
            have been  recruited across nine  sites in Austria. Source of illustration: CORSA   study  team, 2020.
                  than 13,500 participants have been recruited across nine sites in Austria. Source of illustra‐
           tion: CORSA study team, 2020.
                                 B-PREDICT is an invited two-stage screening project initiated by gastroenterologist
                            Karl Mach at the Hospital Oberpullendorf, Burgenland. Annually, more than 150,000 inhab-
                B‐PREDICT is    anofinvited
                            itants             two‐stage
                                       Burgenland              screening
                                                    aged between              project
                                                                      40 and 80          initiated
                                                                                  are invited to    by   gastroenterologist
                                                                                                 participate in this  program using
           Karl Mach at the Hospital Oberpullendorf, Burgenland. Annually, more than preferred
                            a fecal immunochemical      test  (FIT)  as an initial screening.  Nowadays,    FIT  is the   150,000ap-
                            proach   in testing for occult  blood   in feces used   for CRC  screening
           inhabitants of Burgenland aged between 40 and 80 are invited to participate in this pro‐     programs     [6]. FIT-positive
                            (≥10 µg hemoglobin/g feces) tested individuals are offered a complete colonoscopy and
           gram using a fecal  immunochemical test (FIT) as an initial screening. Nowadays, FIT is
                            are asked to participate in CORSA and provide an EDTA blood sample, questionnaire, and
           the preferred approach      in testing
                            written informed         for occult
                                                 consent             blood in
                                                           for the CORSA          feces Within
                                                                               biobank.   used for    CRC screening
                                                                                                  B-PREDICT,                  pro‐
                                                                                                                 we have recruited
           grams [6]. FIT‐positive     (≥10 μg
                            CRC patients,         hemoglobin
                                              patients with     high-/andg feces)
                                                                             low-risk tested   individuals
                                                                                        adenomas as     well asare offered
                                                                                                                 population-based a
                            controls.   These   controls are    triggered   by  a  positive
           complete colonoscopy and are asked to participate in CORSA and provide an EDTA   FIT  result, and  because     all of them
                            underwent a colonoscopy, they were known to be free of polyps and CRC. The high-risk
           blood sample, questionnaire,         and written informed consent for the CORSA biobank.
                            adenoma group included patients with adenomatous tubular polyps >1 cm, adenomatous
           Within B‐PREDICT,     we have polyps,
                            tubulo-villous     recruited      CRC patients,
                                                       adenomatous                   patientssessile
                                                                           villous polyps,       withserrated
                                                                                                        high‐ and
                                                                                                                polyps  low‐risk
                                                                                                                           (SSA) and
           adenomas as welltraditional
                              as population‐based
                                          serrated polyps (TSA). Adenomatous tubular polyps <1 cm werepositive
                                                           controls.     These     controls   are  triggered     by   a   considered
           FIT result, and as  low-risk
                          because         polyps.
                                      all of themBaseline      characteristics of
                                                     underwent a         colonoscopy,recruited  CORSA
                                                                                             they        participants
                                                                                                   were known                 free in
                                                                                                                           begiven
                                                                                                                       toare
                            Table  1.
           of polyps and CRC. The high‐risk adenoma group included patients with adenomatous
           tubular polyps >1 cm, adenomatous tubulo‐villous polyps, adenomatous villous polyps,
           sessile serrated polyps (SSA) and traditional serrated polyps (TSA). Adenomatous tubu‐
           lar polyps < 1 cm were considered as low‐risk polyps. Baseline characteristics of recruited
           CORSA participants are given in Table 1.
Biology 2021, 10, 722                                                                                                              4 of 12




                        Table 1. Demographic and clinical characteristics of CORSA participants (as of May 2020).

                                                                 Colorectal Cancer Study of Austria (n = 13,573)
                                                       CRC                    HR a                   LR b                Controls c
                                                       1551                   2132                   3745                   6145
                         Gender n (%)
                                Male                947 (61.1)             1468 (68.9)            2254 (60.2)            2660 (43.3)
                         Age n (%)
                                 <50                157 (10.1)              189 (8.9)             485 (13.0)             1738 (28.3)
                                50–59               259 (16.7)             451 (21.1)             926 (24.7)             1583 (25.8)
                                60–69               429 (27.7)             741 (34.8)             1253 (33.4)            1546 (25.1)
                                 ≥70                706 (45.5)             751 (35.2)             1081 (28.9)            1278 (20.8)
                         Stage n (%) d
                                   I                423 (27.3)                  –                      –                      –
                                  II                395 (25.5)                  –                      –                      –
                                  III               410 (26.4)                  –                      –                      –
                                  IV                213 (13.7)                  –                      –                      –
                              Missing                110 (7.1)                  –                      –                      –
                         Site n (%) e
                            Colon-distal            404 (26.0)                  –                      –                      –
                          Colon-proximal            441 (28.5)                  –                      –                      –
                              Rectum                686 (44.2)                  –                      –                      –
                             Unknown                  20 (1.3)                  –                      –                      –
                        CORSA participants with multiple recruitment time points were classified according to their most severe
                        histopathological finding. In addition, histopathological findings are recorded at each CORSA participation. a HR:
                        high-risk adenomas. b LR: low-risk adenomas (adenomas are classified according to their most severe finding).
                        c Controls are defined as patients with a negative colonoscopy finding (free of polyps and carcinoma). d UICC

                        stage based on the TNM Classification of Malignant Tumors. e Localization of polyps can be provided from
                        clinical records. Distal colon: sigmoid colon, descending colon, splenic flexure. Proximal colon: transverse colon,
                        hepatic flexure, ascending colon, cecum, appendix. Rectum: rectum, rectosigmoid junction.

                             FIT-positive participants from the B-PREDICT screening are recruited when undergo-
                        ing colonoscopy and comprise CRC patients, high- and low-risk polyps and colonoscopy-
                        negative controls. CORSA participants from other centers are recruited before surgery or
                        at the time of their clinical follow-up and are mainly CRC cases. All subjects gave written
                        informed consent, and the study was approved by the institutional review boards.

                        2.2. Biospecimen Collection
                             Genomic DNA, plasma (divided into aliquots in barcoded tubes) and stool samples are
                        collected at each CORSA site using harmonized protocols and stored at −80 ◦ C. Paraffin-
                        embedded (FFPE) tissue from CRC cases is stored at room temperature.
                             Within CORSA, no regular sequential follow-up recruitment is performed.
                             Blood draws are performed at least at baseline (first participation in CORSA). In
                        addition, 2263 CORSA participants (17%) have been repeatedly recruited. On average,
                        these participants were recruited about 2.3 times. The mean time period between single
                        participations amounts to 2.9 years. Some participants have a follow-up of about 15 years.
                             Survival data, representing a comprehensive output file comprising confirmed or
                        unconfirmed date of death, date of last contact, and information on missing or incorrect
                        data input, are provided through a biennial clinical data abstraction from the IT database
                        of the Medical University of Vienna, “Allgemeines Krankenhaus Information Manage-
                        ment” (AKIM) in cooperation with Statistics Austria. In addition, we abstract survival
Biology 2021, 10, 722                                                                                                                5 of 12




                                    data in cooperation with the Main Association of Austrian Social Insurance Institutions
                                    (“Hauptverband der österreichischen Sozialversicherungsträger”). Therefore, the social
                                    insurance number, first and last name, date of birth, and sex of all participants were pro-
                                    cessed through a database pipeline. For a subset of the data, the cause of death in terms of
                                    ICD-10 category codes of the World Health Organization can be obtained.

                                    2.3. Clinical Data
                                         Clinical data were abstracted from medical records and processed in a structured
                                    database following standardized documentation guidelines and according to the General
                                    Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). The CORSA databank comprises structured infor-
                                    mation on diagnosis, treatment, histology, progression (recurrence and metastasis), and
                                    survival data (Table 2). Follow-up on clinical data is regularly performed. Some CORSA
                                    participants have been followed up for about 15 years.

                                 Table 2. CORSA data resources: questionnaire data and clinical databank.

                                                           CORSA Questionnaire
                  Category                                                        Assessed Variable
               Demographics                                                   Name, gender, date of birth
                    Height                                                           Height in cm
                   Weight                                                            Weight in kg
                        BMI                                                       Defined as kg/m2
                Family status                                    Single, married, divorced, widowed, life partnership
              Education status                              Elementary school, secondary school, matriculation, university
                Employment                                          Employed, retired, unemployed, home keeping
                                                           Current or former smoker (age at start/stop, cigarettes per day)
                  Smoking
                                                                                  Never smoker
           Alcohol consumption                                 Abstainer, former consumer, consumer (self-assessment)
                        Diet                                           Self-assessment of food frequency intake
                                             Diabetes status, treatment (dietary restriction, insulin, medication name), year of diagnosis
                   Diabetes
                                                                                     HbA1c level
                                              CORSA Databank: Abstracted Clinical Data
                  Category                                                        Assessed Variable
          Family history of CRC                                            First- or second-degree relatives
                Colonoscopy                              Date and site of diagnostic colonoscopy (resident physician, hospital)
                   Surgery                                                Date and type of curative surgery
                                                                                 Invasive carcinoma
           Histological findings
                                                                        Histology, amount, and size of polyps
              Mutation status                                             KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, MSI
   Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD)                       Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, e.g., (pathologically confirmed)
                                                Appendix, caecum, valvula, colon ascendens, flexura coli dextra, colon transversum,
                Localization
                                             flexura coli sinistra, colon descendens, sigmoid colon, rectosigmoid junction, rectum, anus
                   Grading                                           Cell differentiation and growth rate, G1–G4
                                                                         Progression and spread in the body
                                                                         Extent (size) of tumor (T): Tis, T0–T4
       TNM staging (UICC system)                                      Spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): N0–N2
                                                                        amount of positive and resected nodes
                                                                    Spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): M0, M1
Biology 2021, 10, 722                                                                                                               6 of 12




                                                             Table 2. Cont.

                                            CORSA Databank: Abstracted Clinical Data
                  Category                                                      Assessed Variable
       Cancer stage (UICC system)                                                   Stage 0–IV
                                                          Neoadjuvant radiation, chemotherapy, radio-chemotherapy
          Neoadjuvant treatment                             Adjuvant radiation, chemotherapy, radio-chemotherapy
                                            Palliative radiation, chemotherapy, radio-chemotherapy, and amount of administered
                                                                                 therapy cycles
           Second primary CRC                                           Synchronous, metachronous CRC
         Secondary malignancies                                          Any carcinoma other than CRC
           Local CRC recurrence            Pathologically confirmed CRC recurrence at the anastomosis or nearby the primary tumor
          Distant CRC metastasis              Distant recurrence or spread to distant sites (first three sites of metastases assessed)
                Survival data                            Date of death, date of last contact, CRC-related cause of death


                                   2.4. Questionnaires
                                        CORSA participants provided at least a basic CORSA questionnaire assessing data
                                   on body mass index (BMI), smoking history, alcohol consumption, education level, family
                                   status, profession, basic dietary habits, and diabetes (Table 2). Patient information and
                                   interviewing was performed by trained study personnel.
                                        Additionally, CORSA participants were asked to complete a slightly modified version
                                   of the VITamins And Lifestyle cohort study (VITAL) questionnaire and the European
                                   Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition Food Frequency Questionnaire (EPIC-
                                   Potsdam FFQ2). The VITAL questionnaire assesses the use of nutritional supplements,
                                   vitamins, medication, physical activity, and social environment [8]. The EPIC-Potsdam
                                   FFQ2 questionnaire was designed to capture detailed dietary habits and is used to receive
                                   habitual dietary food or nutrient intake [9].

                                   3. Result
                                   3.1. Generated Data
                                         So far, we have generated genomics data, metabolomics data, folate-dependent one-
                                   carbon metabolism data, and leukocyte telomere length data from the CORSA biobank
                                   (Table 3). GWAS data are available from 2677 CORSA participants using the Axiom Ar-
                                   ray Human Genome-Wide CEU1 array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) comprising
                                   1060 CRC, 689 high-risk polyps, and 928 colonoscopy-negative controls. Metabolomics
                                   data, targeted as well as untargeted, are available from 88 CRC, 200 high-risk polyps,
                                   200 low-risk polyps, and 400 controls. Untargeted metabolomics was conducted using
                                   ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrome-
                                   try (UHPLC-qTOF-MS, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Samples for targeted
                                   metabolomics were analyzed with the AbsoluteIDQTM p180 kit (Biocrates Life Sciences,
                                   Innsbruck, Austria). Both analyses were performed at the biomarker lab headed by Au-
                                   gustin Scalbert (International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France).
                                         Furthermore, data on folate and biomarkers related to one-carbon metabolism are
                                   available from 245 CRC patients at three follow-up time points: baseline (n = 218), 6 months
                                   (n = 10), and 12 months (n = 17). The analytical measurements were performed at Bevital AS,
                                   Bergen, Norway. Conducting liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS-
                                   MS) circulating folate, folate derivatives, and folic acid were detected. Gas chromatography
                                   tandem mass spectrometry (GC-MS-MS) was performed to analyze other amino acids.
                                   C-reactive protein, cystatin C, and its variants were measured by matrix-assisted laser
                                   desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometric analysis.
Biology 2021, 10, 722                                                                                                              7 of 12




                             Telomere length data from 2011 CORSA participants (384 CRC, 544 high-risk polyps,
                        537 low-risk polyps and 546 controls) were determined using monochrome multiplex
                        quantitative PCR (MMQPCR).

                        Table 3. Available CORSA data derived from GWAS, metabolomics, folate biomarkers, and leukocyte
                        telomere length analyses.

                                                                                               CORSA
                                  Available Data                     CRC               HR a               LR b           Controls c
                                    GWAS data                        1060               689                 –                928
                          Untargeted metabolomics data                 88               200                200               400
                           Targeted metabolomics data                  88               200                200               400
                         Folate-related biomarker status              245                 –                 –                  –
                            Leukocyte telomere length                 384               544                537               546
                        a HR: high-risk adenomas. b LR: low-risk adenomas. c Controls are defined as patients with a negative colonoscopy

                        finding (free of polyps and carcinoma).


                        3.2. Key Findings and Publications
                              CORSA key publications are based on genomics and metabolomics: “Bayesian and
                        frequentist analysis of an Austrian genome-wide association study of colorectal cancer and
                        advanced adenomas”, “Plasma metabolites associated with colorectal cancer: a discovery
                        replication study” and “Plasma metabolites associated with colorectal cancer stage: findings
                        from an international consortium” [10–12]. All publications related to CORSA are listed in
                        Supplementary Table S1 [13–22].
                              We have performed a GWAS of CORSA participants comprising 1060 CRC patients,
                        689 patients with advanced colorectal adenomas, 928 colonoscopy-negative controls, and
                        additionally, 3439 controls from the “Cooperative Health Research in the Region of Augs-
                        burg” (KORA) using Axiom Arrays CEU 1 (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). We pursued
                        a dual approach to investigate genome-wide associations with disease risk applying both
                        single marker analysis as well as model selection based on the modified Bayesian informa-
                        tion criterion, mBIC2, implemented in the software package MOSGWA. The advantage
                        of the model selection approach is its larger power to detect candidate SNPs compared
                        to single marker tests. Furthermore, 56 SNPs that are already known to influence CRC
                        susceptibility from previous studies were tested in a hypothesis-driven approach and some
                        of them were also found to be relevant in CORSA. Furthermore, we found some so-far
                        unreported SNPs [10].
                              This GWAS was the basis for many international cooperation projects: the Genetics
                        and Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO) at the Fred Hutchinson
                        Cancer Center, Seattle, Washington, two European Cooperation in Science and Technology
                        (COST) Actions “Cooperation studies on inherited susceptibility to colorectal cancer”
                        (BMI1206) and “Identifying biomarkers through translation research and prevention and
                        stratification of colorectal cancer” (CA17118).
                              Within the “Metabolomic profiles throughout the continuum of colorectal carcino-
                        genesis” (MetaboCCC) consortium, we performed an untargeted metabolomics study
                        comprising 268 CRC patients and 353 controls using independent discovery and replication
                        sets from two European cohorts, the ColoCare Study from Germany and CORSA. The aim
                        of this study was to identify circulating plasma metabolites associated with CRC and to
                        improve knowledge regarding CRC etiology. Multiple logistic regression models were used
                        to test the association between disease state and metabolic features. We identified 691 sta-
                        tistically significant features in the discovery cohort. Testing the second cohort narrowed it
                        to 97. These corresponded to 28 metabolites, of which 15 could be identified [11].
                              Furthermore, we performed a targeted metabolomics profiling within the MetaboCCC
                        consortium aiming to identify biomarkers related to CRC progression. We investigated plasma
Biology 2021, 10, 722                                                                                           8 of 12




                        concentrations of 130 metabolites from 744 CRC patients (stages I-IV) from two Dutch cohorts
                        (COLON, EnCoRe), the ColoCare study from Germany, and CORSA. Our results suggest
                        that metabolic pathway involving citrulline, histidine, and other molecules that have been
                        previously implicated in CRC development may also be linked to progression [12].

                        4. Discussion
                              CORSA has multiple strengths bringing together a multidisciplinary team of molecu-
                        lar biologists, clinicians, laboratory scientists, and statisticians to foster research on CRC.
                        The close collaboration with clinicians and clinical centers allows a regular and compre-
                        hensive clinical follow-up as well as the automated abstraction of data such as survival
                        information. The multicenter cohort standardized the recruitment of patients, with uniform
                        protocols for the collection, processing, and management of biospecimens. Participants
                        were mainly Caucasian and geographically and ethnically uniform. The comprehensive
                        biological samples and harmonized data provides the basis for national and international
                        cooperation projects on CRC research. Therefore, CORSA represents an active and lead-
                        ing player in cooperation, support actions, and consortia. So far, CORSA contributed to
                        multiple international consortia such as Genetics and Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer
                        Consortium (GECCO) [23–49], COlorectal cancer GENeTics (COGENT) and COnsortium
                        of METabolomics Studies (COMETS) [13]. Furthermore, CORSA was a partner in two
                        ERANET-TRANSCAN-funded projects: MetaboCCC [11,12,44–46,50,51], and “Biomark-
                        ers related to folate-dependent metabolism in colorectal cancer recurrence and survival”
                        (FOCUS) [35,36]. These interdisciplinary projects bring together multiple European CRC
                        cohorts, including CORSA, the ColoCare study of the German Cancer Research Center
                        in Heidelberg [14], the EnCoRe study of Maastricht University, the Netherlands [15], as
                        well as the COLON study of Wageningen University, the Netherlands [16]. In the course of
                        this collaboration study, data have been pooled and harmonized to increase the statistical
                        power for joint analysis.
                              A major strength of the biobank is the colonoscopy-negative control group, known
                        to be free of polyps and CRC because all participants underwent a complete colonoscopy
                        within the screening project B-PREDICT.
                              Nevertheless, some limitations have to be mentioned. CORSA high-risk and low-
                        risk adenomas as well as controls are mainly recruited within the screening program
                        B-PREDICT from centers in Burgenland rather than from centers in Vienna. The reason
                        is that in Vienna no organized CRC screening program has been performed so far; there-
                        fore, no colonoscopy-negative controls can be recruited. In Austria, the organization of
                        CRC screening programs is not regulated nationwide; it is a matter of the federal states.
                        Within CORSA, no regularly invited, targeted recruitment at defined follow-up time points
                        is performed.
                              A new research focus of CORSA besides genomics and metabolomics is the gut mi-
                        crobiome. Recently, the project “Gut MICRObiome-based approach for incorporating
                        new biomarkers into COLOrectal cancer screening” (MICROCOLO) was funded by the
                        Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG). There is evidence that changes in the gut
                        microbiome occur during different stages of colorectal neoplasia, supporting an etiologic
                        and diagnostic role for the microbiome. Harnessing knowledge of the microbiota may
                        lead to new preventive strategies and diagnostics. myBioma GmbH, our company part-
                        ner within this FFG-funded project, will use their already established data processing
                        and statistical analysis workflow to process the resulting microbiome data. Predictive
                        microbiome-based signatures specific for CRC and high-risk adenomas will be defined by
                        multivariate statistical modelling. The combination of conventional screening methods
                        such as FIT with microbiome-based methods is a promising tool for early detection of CRC
                        and could improve diagnostic accuracy.
Biology 2021, 10, 722                                                                                                                 9 of 12




                                   5. Conclusions
                                        The CORSA biobank, comprising genomic DNA, plasma, fecal samples, and a compre-
                                   hensive CORSA database, represents a valuable resource for ongoing and future OMICS-
                                   based CRC projects. CORSA is open for cooperative research projects; expressions of
                                   interest are more than welcome.

                                   Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/10
                                   .3390/biology10080722/s1, Table S1: Complete list of CORSA publications (as of June 2021).
                                   Author Contributions: A.G. is responsible for the conception and design of CORSA, obtaining of
                                   funding and drafting the manuscript. A.B. was involved in statistical analysis and data interpreta-
                                   tion. S.B. was mainly involved in the analysis of metabolomics and genomics datasets and in the
                                   management of the CORSA database, including the recruitment of patients, and collection of clinical
                                   data. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                   Funding: Analyses or measurements conducted within the CORSA study have been supported by
                                   funding from FFG (Bridge, Project number: 829675), FWF (I1542-B-13), ERA-NET on Translational
                                   Cancer Research (TRANSCAN) (I1578-B19), TRANSCAN (I2104-B26), and the Medical University of
                                   Vienna. CORSA did not receive any funding awarding only the study itself.
                                   Institutional Review Board Statement: Using samples from the CORSA biobank is subject to strict
                                   ethical and legal regulations. Ethics approval, data transfer agreement (DTA) and/or material transfer
                                   agreement (MTA) is necessary for each study. All CORSA subjects have provided written informed
                                   consent and the study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical University of Vienna
                                   (EK 1160/2016) and the Ethics Committee of the Federal State Burgenland (EK 33/2010).
                                   Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
                                   Data Availability Statement: Paper concept proposals of interest for cooperation studies are
                                   welcomed. Please send a short proposal to the corresponding author, Andrea Gsur
                                   (andrea.gsur@meduniwien.ac.at). The proposal must include a working title, author information,
                                   scientific rationale and objectives, study design (study data, primary analysis plan), and material
                                   (genomic DNA or plasma) or data requested.
                                   Acknowledgments: We acknowledge the contribution to CORSA of all participants who have
                                   provided samples and questionnaires. We thank the supporting recruitment teams of all study sites.
                                   The authors would also like to thank all physicians (Michael Micksche, Karl Mach, Gernot Leeb,
                                   Azita Deutinger-Permoon, Wilfried Horvath, Paul A. Gabriel, Gerhard Böhm, Anton Stift, Thomas
                                   Bachleitner-Hofmann, Judith Karner-Hanusch, Johannes Längle, Michael Bergmann, Josef Karner,
                                   Stefan Stättner, Marie C. Singer, Katharina Kosma, Gerhard Halter, Thomas Grünberger, Wolfgang
                                   Hulla, Harald Kirschner, Werner Weiss, Thomas Pulgram, Christian Madl and Friedrich Längle)
                                   and all technicians that have been involved in the CORSA recruitment. Furthermore, we want to
                                   acknowledge the MetaboCCC consortium and the COST Actions (BMI1206 and CA17118).
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Ferlay, J.; Colombet, M.; Soerjomataram, I.; Mathers, C.; Parkin, D.M.; Piñeros, M.; Znaor, A.; Bray, F. Estimating the global cancer
      incidence and mortality in 2018: GLOBOCAN sources and methods. Int. J. Cancer 2019, 144, 1941–1953. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Fearon, E.R. Molecular Genetics of Colorectal Cancer. Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2011, 6, 479–507. [CrossRef]
3.    O’Connell, J.B.; Maggard, M.A.; Ko, C.Y. Colon Cancer Survival Rates With the New American Joint Committee on Cancer Sixth
      Edition Staging. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 2004, 96, 1420–1425. [CrossRef]
4.    Armaghany, T.; Wilson, J.D.; Chu, Q.; Mills, G. Genetic Alterations in Colorectal Cancer. Gastrointest. Cancer Res. 2012, 5, 19–27.
5.    Roselló, S.; Simón, S.; Cervantes, A. Programmed colorectal cancer screening decreases incidence and mortality. Transl. Gastroen-
      terol. Hepatol. 2019, 4, 84. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Passamonti, B.; Malaspina, M.; Fraser, C.G.; Tintori, B.; Carlani, A.; D’Angelo, V.; Galeazzi, P.; Di Dato, E.; Mariotti, L.; Bulletti,
      S.; et al. A comparative effectiveness trial of two faecal immunochemical tests for haemoglobin (FIT). Assessment of test
      performance and adherence in a single round of a population-based screening programme for colorectal cancer. Gut 2018, 67,
      485–496. [CrossRef]
Biology 2021, 10, 722                                                                                                                  10 of 12




7.    Feik, E.; Baierl, A.; Hieger, B.; Fuhrlinger, G.; Pentz, A.; Stattner, S.; Weiss, W.; Pulgram, T.; Leeb, G.; Mach, K.; et al. Association
      of IGF1 and IGFBP3 polymorphisms with colo-rectal polyps and colorectal cancer risk. Cancer Causes Control 2010, 21, 91–97.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.    White, E.; Patterson, R.E.; Kristal, A.; Thornquist, M.; King, I.; Shattuck, A.L.; Evans, I.; Satia-Abouta, J.; Littman, A.J.; Potter, J.
      VITamins And Lifestyle Cohort Study: Study Design and Characteristics of Supplement Users. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2004, 159, 83–93.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.    Nothlings, U.; Hoffmann, K.; Bergmann, M.M.; Boeing, H. Fitting portion sizes in a self-administered food frequency question-
      naire. J. Nutr. 2007, 137, 2781–2786. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.   Hofer, P.; Hagmann, M.; Brezina, S.; Dolejsi, E.; Mach, K.; Leeb, G.; Baierl, A.; Buch, S.; Sutterlüty-Fall, H.; Karner-Hanusch,
      J.; et al. Bayesian and frequentist analysis of an Austrian genome-wide association study of colorectal cancer and advanced
      adenomas. Oncotarget 2017, 8, 98623–98634. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.   Geijsen, A.; Brezina, S.; Keski-Rahkonen, P.; Baierl, A.; Bachleitner-Hofmann, T.; Bergmann, M.M.; Boehm, J.; Brenner, H.;
      Chang-Claude, J.; van Duijnhoven, F.J.B.; et al. Plasma metabolites associated with colorectal cancer: A discovery-replication
      strategy. Int. J. Cancer 2019, 145, 1221–1231. [CrossRef]
12.   Geijsen, A.J.; Van Roekel, E.H.; Van Duijnhoven, F.J.; Achaintre, D.; Bachleitner-Hofmann, T.; Baierl, A.; Bergmann, M.M.; Boehm,
      J.; Bours, M.J.; Brenner, H.; et al. Plasma metabolites associated with colorectal cancer stage: Findings from an international
      consortium. Int. J. Cancer 2020, 146, 3256–3266. [CrossRef]
13.   Playdon, M.C.; Joshi, A.D.; Tabung, F.K.; Cheng, S.; Henglin, M.; Kim, A.; Lin, T.; Van Roekel, E.H.; Huang, J.; Krumsiek, J.; et al.
      Metabolomics Analytics Workflow for Epidemiological Research: Perspectives from the Consortium of Metabolomics Studies
      (COMETS). Metabolites 2019, 9, 145. [CrossRef]
14.   Ulrich, C.M.; Gigic, B.; Böhm, J.; Ose, J.; Viskochil, R.; Schneider, M.; Colditz, G.A.; Figueiredo, J.C.; Grady, W.M.; Li, C.I.; et al.
      The ColoCare Study: A Paradigm of Transdisciplinary Science in Colorectal Cancer Outcomes. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev.
      2019, 28, 591–601. [CrossRef]
15.   van Roekel, E.H.; Bours, M.J.; de Brouwer, C.P.; Ten Napel, H.; Sanduleanu, S.; Beets, G.L.; Kant, J.I.; Weijenberg, M.P. The
      applicability of the international classification of functioning, disability, and health to study lifestyle and quality of life of
      colorectal cancer survivors. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 2014, 23, 1394–1405. [CrossRef]
16.   Winkels, R.M.; Heine-Bröring, R.C.; van Zutphen, M.; van Harten-Gerritsen, S.; Kok, D.E.; van Duijnhoven, F.J.; Kampman, E.
      The COLON study: Colorectal cancer: Longitudinal, Observational study on Nutritional and lifestyle factors that may influence
      colorectal tumour recurrence, survival and quality of life. BMC Cancer 2014, 14, 374. [CrossRef]
17.   Gsur, A.; Bernhart, K.; Baierl, A.; Feik, E.; Führlinger, G.; Höfer, P.; Leeb, G.; Mach, K.; Micksche, M. No association of XRCC1
      polymorphisms Arg194Trp and Arg399Gln with colorectal cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol. 2011, 35, e38–e41. [CrossRef]
18.   Hofer, P.; Baierl, A.; Feik, E.; Führlinger, G.; Leeb, G.; Mach, K.; Holzmann, K.; Micksche, M.; Gsur, A. MNS16A tandem repeats
      minisatellite of human telomerase gene: A risk factor for colorectal cancer. Carcinogenesis 2011, 32, 866–871. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.   Hofer, P.; Baierl, A.; Bernhart, K.; Leeb, G.; Mach, K.; Micksche, M.; Gsur, A. Association of genetic variants of human telomerase
      with colorectal polyps and colorectal cancer risk. Mol. Carcinog. 2012, 51, E176–E182. [CrossRef]
20.   Heinzle, C.; Gsur, A.; Hunjadi, M.; Erdem, Z.; Gauglhofer, C.; Stättner, S.; Karner, J.; Klimpfinger, M.; Wrba, F.; Reti, A.; et al.
      Differential Effects of Polymorphic Alleles of FGF Receptor 4 on Colon Cancer Growth and Metastasis. Cancer Res. 2012, 72,
      5767–5777. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.   Zöchmeister, C.; Brezina, S.; Höfer, P.; Baierl, A.; Bergmann, M.M.; Bachleitner-Hofmann, T.; Karner-Hanusch, J.; Stift, A.;
      Gerger, A.; Leeb, G.; et al. Leukocyte telomere length throughout the continuum of colorectal carcinogenesis. Oncotarget 2018, 9,
      13582–13592. [CrossRef]
22.   Jiraskova, K.; Hughes, D.J.; Brezina, S.; Gumpenberger, T.; Veskrnova, V.; Buchler, T.; Schneiderova, M.; Levy, M.; Liska, V.;
      Vodenkova, S.; et al. Functional Polymorphisms in DNA Re-pair Genes Are Associated with Sporadic Colorectal Cancer
      Susceptibility and Clinical Outcome. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 20, 97. [CrossRef]
23.   Luna Coronell, J.A.; Sergelen, K.; Hofer, P.; Gyurjan, I.; Brezina, S.; Hettegger, P.; Leeb, G.; Mach, K.; Gsur, A.; Weinhäusel, A. The
      Immunome of Colon Cancer: Functional In Silico Analysis of Antigenic Proteins Deduced from IgG Microarray Profiling. Genom.
      Proteom. Bioinform. 2018, 16, 73–84. [CrossRef]
24.   Huyghe, J.R.; Bien, S.A.; Harrison, T.A.; Kang, H.M.; Chen, S.; Schmit, S.L.; Conti, D.V.; Qu, C.; Jeon, J.; Edlund, C.K.; et al.
      Discovery of common and rare genetic risk variants for colorectal cancer. Nat. Genet. 2019, 51, 76–87. [CrossRef]
25.   Law, P.J.; Timofeeva, M.; Fernandez-Rozadilla, C.; Broderick, P.; Studd, J.; Fernandez-Tajes, J.; Farrington, S.; Svinti, V.; Palles, C.;
      Orlando, G.; et al. Association analyses identify 31 new risk loci for colorectal cancer susceptibility. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1–15.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.   Schafmayer, C.; Harrison, J.W.; Buch, S.; Lange, C.; Reichert, M.C.; Hofer, P.; Cossais, F.; Kupcinskas, J.; von Schönfels, W.;
      Schniewind, B.; et al. Genome-wide association analysis of diverticular disease points towards neuromuscular, connective tissue
      and epithelial pathomechanisms. Gut 2019, 68, 854–865. [CrossRef]
27.   Schmit, S.L.; Edlund, C.K.; Schumacher, F.R.; Gong, J.; Harrison, T.A.; Huyghe, J.R.; Qu, C.; Melas, M.; Van Den Berg, D.J.; Wang,
      H.; et al. Novel Common Genetic Susceptibility Loci for Colorectal Cancer. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 2019, 111, 146–157. [CrossRef]
Biology 2021, 10, 722                                                                                                                      11 of 12




28.   Cornish, A.J.; Law, P.J.; Timofeeva, M.; Palin, K.; Farrington, S.M.; Palles, C.; Jenkins, M.A.; Casey, G.; Brenner, H.; Chang-Claude,
      J.; et al. Modifiable pathways for colorectal cancer: A mendelian randomisation analysis. Lancet Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2020, 5,
      55–62. [CrossRef]
29.   Holowatyj, A.N.; Gigic, B.; Herpel, E.; Scalbert, A.; Schneider, M.; Ulrich, C.M.; MetaboCCC Consortium; ColoCare Study. Distinct
      Molecular Phenotype of Sporadic Colo-rectal Cancers Among Young Patients Based on Multiomics Analysis. Gastroenterology
      2020, 158, 1155–1158.e2. [CrossRef]
30.   Archambault, A.N.; Su, Y.-R.; Jeon, J.; Thomas, M.; Lin, Y.; Conti, D.V.; Win, A.K.; Sakoda, L.C.; Lansdorp-Vogelaar, I.; Peterse,
      E.F.; et al. Cumulative Burden of Colorectal Cancer–Associated Genetic Variants Is More Strongly Associated With Early-Onset
      vs. Late-Onset Cancer. Gastroenterology 2020, 158, 1274–1286.e12. [CrossRef]
31.   Lu, Y.; Kweon, S.-S.; Cai, Q.; Tanikawa, C.; Shu, X.-O.; Jia, W.-H.; Xiang, Y.-B.; Huyghe, J.R.; Harrison, T.A.; Kim, J.; et al.
      Identification of Novel Loci and New Risk Variant in Known Loci for Colorectal Cancer Risk in East Asians. Cancer Epidemiol.
      Biomark. Prev. 2020, 29, 477–486. [CrossRef]
32.   Murphy, N.; Carreras-Torres, R.; Song, M.; Chan, A.T.; Martin, R.M.; Papadimitriou, N.; Dimou, N.; Tsilidis, K.K.; Banbury,
      B.; Bradbury, K.E.; et al. Circulating Levels of Insulin-like Growth Factor 1 and Insulin-like Growth Factor Binding Protein 3
      Associate With Risk of Colorectal Cancer Based on Sero-logic and Mendelian Randomization Analyses. Gastroenterology 2020, 158,
      1300–1312.e20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.   Papadimitriou, N.; Dimou, N.; Tsilidis, K.K.; Banbury, B.; Martin, R.M.; Lewis, S.J.; Kazmi, N.; Robinson, T.M.; Albanes, D.;
      Aleksandrova, K.; et al. Physical activity and risks of breast and colorectal cancer: A Mendelian randomisation analysis. Nat.
      Commun. 2020, 11, 597. [CrossRef]
34.   Zaidi, S.H.; Harrison, T.A.; Phipps, A.I.; Steinfelder, R.; Trinh, Q.M.; Qu, C.; Banbury, B.L.; Georgeson, P.; Grasso, C.S.; Giannakis,
      M.; et al. Landscape of somatic single nucleotide variants and indels in colorectal cancer and impact on survival. Nat. Commun.
      2020, 11, 3644. [CrossRef]
35.   Thomas, M.; Sakoda, L.C.; Hoffmeister, M.; Rosenthal, E.A.; Lee, J.K.; van Duijnhoven, F.J.; Platz, E.A.; Wu, A.H.; Dampier, C.H.;
      de la Chapelle, A.; et al. Genome-wide Modeling of Polygenic Risk Score in Colorectal Cancer Risk. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2020, 107,
      432–444. [CrossRef]
36.   Koole, J.L.; Bours, M.J.L.; Geijsen, A.J.M.R.; Gigic, B.; Ulvik, A.; Kok, D.E.; Brezina, S.; Ose, J.; Baierl, A.; Böhm, J.; et al. Circulating
      B-vitamin biomarkers and B-vitamin supplement use in relation to quality of life in patients with colorectal cancer: Results from
      the FOCUS consortium. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2021, 113, 1468–1481. [CrossRef]
37.   Geijsen, A.J.M.R.; Ulvik, A.; Gigic, B.; Kok, D.E.; van Duijnhoven, F.J.B.; Holowatyj, A.N.; Brezina, S.; van Roekel, E.H.; Baierl, A.;
      Bergmann, M.M.; et al. Circulating Folate and Folic Acid Concentrations: Associations With Colorectal Cancer Recurrence and
      Survival. JNCI Cancer Spectr. 2020, 4, pkaa051. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.   Jarvik, G.P.; Wang, X.; Fontanillas, P.; Kim, E.; Chanprasert, S.; Gordon, A.S.; Bastarache, L.; Kowdley, K.V.; Harrison, T.; Rosenthal,
      E.A.; et al. Hemochromatosis risk genotype is not associated with colorectal cancer or age at its diagnosis. Hum. Genet. Genom.
      Adv. 2020, 1, 100010. [CrossRef]
39.   Guo, X.; Lin, W.; Wen, W.; Huyghe, J.; Bien, S.; Cai, Q.; Harrison, T.; Chen, Z.; Qu, C.; Bao, J.; et al. Identifying Novel Susceptibility
      Genes for Colorectal Cancer Risk From a Transcriptome-Wide Association Study of 125,478 Subjects. Gastroenterology 2021, 160,
      1164–1178.e6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.   Nounu, A.; Greenhough, A.; Heesom, K.J.; Richmond, R.C.; Zheng, J.; Weinstein, S.J.; Albanes, D.; Baron, J.A.; Hopper, J.L.;
      Figueiredo, J.C.; et al. A Combined Proteomics and Mendelian Randomization Approach to Investigate the Effects of Aspirin-
      Targeted Proteins on Colorectal Cancer. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 2021, 30, 564–575. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.   Holowatyj, A.N.; Haffa, M.; Lin, T.; Scherer, D.; Gigic, B.; Ose, J.; Warby, C.A.; Himbert, C.; Abbenhardt-Martin, C.; Achaintre,
      D.; et al. Multi-omics analysis reveals adipose-tumor crosstalk in colorectal cancer patients. Cancer Prev. Res. 2020, 13, 817–828.
      [CrossRef]
42.   Bull, C.J.; Bell, J.A.; Murphy, N.; Sanderson, E.; Smith, G.D.; Timpson, N.J.; Banbury, B.L.; Albanes, D.; Berndt, S.I.; Bézieau,
      S.; et al. Adiposity, metabolites, and colorectal cancer risk: Mendelian randomization study. BMC Med. 2020, 18, 1–16. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
43.   Tsilidis, K.K.; Papadimitriou, N.; Dimou, N.; Gill, D.; Lewis, S.J.; Martin, R.M.; Murphy, N.; Markozannes, G.; Zuber, V.; Cross,
      A.J.; et al. Genetically predicted circulating concentrations of micronutrients and risk of colorectal cancer among individuals of
      European descent: A Mendelian randomization study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2021, 113, 1490–1502. [CrossRef]
44.   Huyghe, R.J.; Harrison, A.T.; Bien, A.S.; Hampel, H.; Figueiredo, C.J.; Schmit, L.S.; Conti, D.V.; Chen, S.; Qi, C.; Lin, Y.; et al.
      Genetic architectures of proximal and distal colorectal cancer are partly distinct. Gut 2021. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.   Geijsen, A.J.M.R.; Kok, D.E.; van Zutphen, M.; Keski-Rahkonen, P.; Achaintre, D.; Gicquiau, A.; Gsur, A.; Kruyt, F.M.; Ulrich,
      C.M.; Weijenberg, M.P.; et al. Diet quality indices and dietary patterns are associated with plasma metabolites in colorectal cancer
      patients. Eur. J. Nutr. 2021, 1–14. [CrossRef]
46.   Gumpenberger, T.; Brezina, S.; Keski-Rahkonen, P.; Baierl, A.; Robinot, N.; Leeb, G.; Habermann, N.; Kok, D.; Scalbert, A.; Ueland,
      P.-M.; et al. Untargeted Metabolomics Reveals Major Differences in the Plasma Metabolome between Colorectal Cancer and
      Colorectal Adenomas. Metabolites 2021, 11, 119. [CrossRef]
Biology 2021, 10, 722                                                                                                                     12 of 12




47.   Ose, J.; Gigic, B.; Brezina, S.; Lin, T.; Baierl, A.; Geijsen, A.; van Roekel, E.; Robinot, N.; Gicquiau, A.; Achaintre, D.; et al. Targeted
      plasma metabolic profiles and risk of recurrence in stage II and III colorectal cancer patients: Results from an international cohort
      consortium Polymorphisms within autophagy-related genes influence the risk of developing colorectal cancer: A meta-analysis
      of four large cohorts. Metabolites 2021, 11, 129. [CrossRef]
48.   Sainz, J.; García-Verdejo, F.; Martínez-Bueno, M.; Kumar, A.; Sánchez-Maldonado, J.; Díez-Villanueva, A.; Vodičková, L.;
      Vymetálková, V.; Sánchez, V.M.; Filho, M.D.S.; et al. Polymorphisms within Autophagy-Related Genes Influence the Risk of
      Developing Colorectal Cancer: A Meta-Analysis of Four Large Cohorts. Cancers 2021, 13, 1258. [CrossRef]
49.   Zheng, T.; Ellinghaus, D.; Juzenas, S.; Cossais, F.; Burmeister, G.; Mayr, G.; Jørgensen, I.F.; Teder-Laving, M.; Skogholt, A.H.; Chen,
      S.; et al. Genome-wide analysis of 944 133 individuals provides insights into the etiology of haemorrhoidal disease. Gut 2021.
      [CrossRef]
50.   Culliford, R.; Cornish, A.J.; Law, P.J.; Farrington, S.M.; Palin, K.; Jenkins, M.A.; Casey, G.; Hoffmeister, M.; Brenner, H.; Chang-
      Claude, J.; et al. Lack of an association between gallstone disease and bilirubin levels with risk of colorectal cancer: A Mendelian
      randomisation analysis. Br. J. Cancer 2021, 124, 1169–1174. [CrossRef]
51.   Papadimitriou, N.; Gunter, M.J.; Murphy, N.; Gicquiau, A.; Achaintre, D.; Brezina, S.; Gumpenberger, T.; Baierl, A.; Ose, J.; Geijsen,
      A.J.; et al. Circulating tryptophan metabolites and risk of colon cancer: Results from case-control and prospective cohort studies.
      Int. J. Cancer 2021. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
