   H



       OH
            OH
                 metabolites

Article
A Metabolic Model of Intestinal Secretions: The Link between
Human Microbiota and Colorectal Cancer Progression
Pejman Salahshouri 1 , Modjtaba Emadi-Baygi 1,2 , Mahdi Jalili 3 , Faiz M. Khan 4 , Olaf Wolkenhauer 4
and Ali Salehzadeh-Yazdi 4, *

                                          1   Department of Genetics, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Shahrekord University, Shahrekord 8818634141, Iran;
                                              pejmansalahshouri@gmail.com (P.S.); emadi-m@sku.ac.ir (M.E.-B.)
                                          2   Biotechnology Research Institute, Shahrekord University, Shahrekord 8818634141, Iran
                                          3   Hematology, Oncology and SCT Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran 14114, Iran;
                                              mahjalili@sina.tums.ac.ir
                                          4   Department of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, University of Rostock, 18051 Rostock, Germany;
                                              faiz.khan3@uni-rostock.de (F.M.K.); olaf.wolkenhauer@uni-rostock.de (O.W.)
                                          *   Correspondence: ali.salehzadeh-yazdi@uni-rostock.de

                                          Abstract: The human gut microbiota plays a dual key role in maintaining human health or induc-
                                          ing disorders, for example, obesity, type 2 diabetes, and cancers such as colorectal cancer (CRC).
                                          High-throughput data analysis, such as metagenomics and metabolomics, have shown the diverse
                                          effects of alterations in dynamic bacterial populations on the initiation and progression of colorectal
                                          cancer. However, it is well established that microbiome and human cells constantly influence each
         
                                   other, so it is not appropriate to study them independently. Genome-scale metabolic modeling is a
                                          well-established mathematical framework that describes the dynamic behavior of these two axes
Citation: Salahshouri, P.;
                                          at the system level. In this study, we created community microbiome models of three conditions
Emadi-Baygi, M.; Jalili, M.; Khan,
F.M.; Wolkenhauer, O.;
                                          during colorectal cancer progression, including carcinoma, adenoma and health status, and showed
Salehzadeh-Yazdi, A. A Metabolic          how changes in the microbial population influence intestinal secretions. Conclusively, our findings
Model of Intestinal Secretions: The       showed that alterations in the gut microbiome might provoke mutations and transform adenomas
Link between Human Microbiota and         into carcinomas. These alterations include the secretion of mutagenic metabolites such as H2 S, NO
Colorectal Cancer Progression.            compounds, spermidine and TMA (trimethylamine), as well as the reduction of butyrate. Further-
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456. https://doi.   more, we found that the colorectal cancer microbiome can promote inflammation, cancer progression
org/10.3390/metabo11070456                (e.g., angiogenesis) and cancer prevention (e.g., apoptosis) by increasing and decreasing certain
                                          metabolites such as histamine, glutamine and pyruvate. Thus, modulating the gut microbiome could
Academic Editors: Yiorgos
                                          be a promising strategy for the prevention and treatment of CRC.
Apidianakis and Agapios Agapiou

                                          Keywords: microbiome; genome-scale metabolic model; community metabolic modeling; colorec-
Received: 2 July 2021
                                          tal cancer
Accepted: 13 July 2021
Published: 15 July 2021


Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                          1. Introduction
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affil-         Cancer is generally known as a disease of the genome arising out of a combination
iations.                                  of genetic mutations, epigenetic modifications and altered signaling pathways. These
                                          mutations occur diversely, sometimes with undetermined origins. However, some cancers
                                          are associated with infectious agents, and some appear in tissues that are exposed to
                                          microbiota (a set of microbial agents present in a specific environment) [1].
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                                                Microbial agents constitute about 90% of the cells in the human body, and it is es-
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          timated that there are 1014 bacteria, comprising 103 species, in the human colon. This
This article is an open access article
                                          signifies that bacterial genes outnumber human genes in the human body [2–5]. Addition-
distributed under the terms and           ally, the density of large intestinal bacteria is approximately 1010 times higher than that of
conditions of the Creative Commons        the small intestinal bacteria, and the risk of cancer in the large intestine is 12 times higher
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     than that that in the small intestine [6,7].
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/                The transformation of adenoma into carcinoma tumors in colorectal cancer (CRC)
4.0/).                                    requires mutations in the cancer-driver genes, which normally takes up to 10 years, and



Metabolites 2021, 11, 456. https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo11070456                                       https://www.mdpi.com/journal/metabolites
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                           2 of 20




                            additional mutations accelerate its progression. There is also a hypothesis that considers the
                            role of the microbiome in CRC, mostly adenomas. The driver–passenger hypothesis states
                            that driver bacteria cause this transformation by triggering DNA damage and persistent
                            inflammation. On the other hand, the tumor microenvironment provides another growth
                            site for opportunistic bacteria called passengers. This even suggests that some probiotic
                            bacteria may take advantage of the tumor microenvironment and prevent the progression
                            of cancer [8].
                                  With the advent of high-throughput technologies, researchers can quantify molecular
                            changes at different cellular levels. These technologies can reveal the complete picture
                            of cell metabolic activity in one snapshot and can unveil the metabolic patterns and
                            function of cells, including the activities of enzymes, gene products, transporters and
                            chemical reactions. Therefore, they would be suitable tools for the metabolic profiling of
                            different cells, both to identify differences between organs and to distinguish metabolic
                            diseases [9–13].
                                  Genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) provide quantitative information about the
                            metabolism of large-scale systems [14]. Using GEMs and optimization methods, such as
                            flux balance analysis (FBA) or flux variable analysis (FVA), the metabolic flux rate for all
                            the reactions in the model can be predicted [15,16]. For deciphering the role of the entire
                            system and the complex relationships of a microbial community, community metabolic
                            modeling (CMM) is introduced [17]. Briefly, CMM is the combination of the ecological
                            model of the microbiota (presence in an environment) and their microbiota GEMs [18].
                            CMM can employ GEMs to examine the interactions between different microorganisms
                            and the cross-feeding in a population (the exchange of metabolites among microorganisms).
                            Different studies have assessed the effect of cross-feeding between host human cells and
                            environmental absorption using CMM. For example, Kumar et al. reconstructed CMM of
                            malnourished children’s gut microbiota by the integration of GEMs. This model revealed
                            a reduction in essential amino acid production by the gut microbiota in malnourished
                            children [19]. Another study investigated metabolic alterations following changes to
                            the gut microbiota composition in metformin-treated type 2 diabetes patients [20]. They
                            suggested that lipopolysaccharide synthesis, nucleotide sugar metabolism and amino acid
                            metabolism are susceptible to changes in gut microbes. The intestinal microbiota and
                            metabolic changes in CRC have been studied using metagenomics and metabolic data,
                            respectively [21,22]. Researchers have proposed some tumor-specific bacterial populations
                            and metabolite regulation in CRC. Kehan Xu et al. investigated the co-occurrence and
                            co-exclusion of bacterial species in the mucosa-associated microbiota of CRC tumors and
                            found potential bacterial biomarkers in the CRC tumor’s microbiota [23].
                                  Additionally, previous studies have explored changes in the bacterial population and
                            their potential impact on CRC initiation or development, as well as metabolic alterations in
                            the CRC tumor lumen and blood serum. By using the same modeling approach, they high-
                            lighted the role of Fusobacterium spp. in the production of glutarate and in the suppression
                            of butyrate and acetate levels in feces [23,24]. Since then, many high-throughput data have
                            unraveled the etiology and complexity of CRC; however, the investigation of CRC and
                            microbiome metabolism remain a subject of inquiry. In the current study, we evaluated the
                            CMM of the gut microbiome and its influence on the initiation and progression of CRC with
                            a comprehensive and metabolomic approach. Our results indicate that alterations in the
                            gut microbiome might provoke CRC’s transformation from an adenoma into a carcinoma.

                            2. Results
                            2.1. Community Microbiome Metabolic Models of CRC in Different Tumors
                                 The community modeling of the microbiome requires the integration of individual
                            bacterial metabolic models (GEMs) based on the proportions of different bacteria present
                            through ecological modeling. In this work, we made use of the MGYS00001248 data [25],
                            an ecological model that consists of metagenomic data of mucus biopsy specimens with
                            adenomas and their adjacent tissue, as well as non-tumor tissue as a control [21]. Adjacent
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                                     3 of 20




                                 tissue samples of adenomas and carcinomas were discarded on the assumption that we
                                 did not know whether they were directly related to CRC (Table 1).

      Table 1. Numbers of samples at different steps of this study. Adjacent tissue samples in MGYS00001248 data were discarded
      since we wanted to focus on in situ tumor and polyp microbiomes. In the normalization step, samples with low read counts
      were removed (in total, 76 of 170 samples were removed). At the modeling step, due to unknown errors, some models were
      infeasible, which we excluded from further analysis. Finally, we considered microbiome metabolism profiles clustered as
      meta-models.

                                                       Normalized Input for         Reconstructed
                                                                                                            Data Analysis and
                             Normalization Input          Microbiome                 Microbiome
                                                                                                           Meta-Model Selection
                                                       Metabolic Modeling          Metabolic Models
         Adenoma                      57                         41                        37                         8
         Carcinoma                    52                         26                        24                         7
          Normal                      61                         27                        27                         6
           Total                      170                        94                        88                         21


                                       To select the GEMs’ best matching with existing metagenome data, we firstly tried to
                                 combine both publicly available databases, AGORA and EMBL. In 2016, AGORA models
                                 (consisting of 773 GEMs of well-known bacteria) were reconstructed to investigate the
                                 reciprocal association of bacterial behaviors and human metabolic diseases [26]. The
                                 AGORA developers showed that the interaction of the species depends on the availability
                                 of nutrients in the diet and the metabolic potential of the models. EMBL–GEMs were
                                 used to create and store automated GEMs of 5587 organisms at the strain level [27]. The
                                 AGORA models were compatible with the COBRA toolbox, but we found that the EMBL–
                                 GEMs were not. Furthermore, the EMBL–GEMs are insufficient in requisite models for
                                 the creation of community models. Since metagenomic data, which consist of bacteria’s
                                 taxonomy and their measure of presence, have insufficient resolution regarding the strains
                                 or species of bacteria, we should modify the taxon list based on experimental knowledge.
                                 Additionally, metagenomic data vary in depth and sample size, which could lead to missing
                                 data. Matching GEMs with bacteria requires identification at the strain or species level.
                                 To minimize the loss of the accuracy of microbial population information, pan-AGORA
                                 models (Supplementary File S1) were constructed using the COBRA toolbox, which are
                                 infrastructure models of subclasses of the family, genus and species models. Then, to
                                 estimate low-resolution reads of taxonomy assignment data, we used publications and
                                 the Disbiome database [28]. Thus, we created a table (Supplementary File S2) of bacterial
                                 GEMs’ names and their abundance for further analysis.
                                       Although using the rarefaction method for metagenomic data analysis is controver-
                                 sial [29–31], it seems rational for metagenomic data normalization [31]. However, one
                                 of the challenges with this method is choosing the right threshold value. In general, an
                                 appropriate value is one in which most of the samples are larger [32]. In the same way,
                                 the rarefaction curves can provide an estimate of the asymptotic richness concerning the
                                 sample counts that are suitable for normalization (Figure 1). By considering these two
                                 approaches, we selected a sample size of 10,000 for normalization. Therefore, samples with
                                 read counts below this value were discarded and, then, the abundances were normalized.
                                 Finally, the taxonomy assignment data were modified and normalized for input data from
                                 864 read rows corresponding to 219 bacterial GEMs collected as the microbiome modeling
                                 toolbox input data (Supplementary File S2).
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                                 4 of 20




                            Figure 1. Rarefaction curves: the relations between the number of species present and total reads in
                            each sample. We used them to perceive and select an appropriate sample size for normalization. As
                            shown, most of the samples were about 10,000 or larger. Furthermore, at sample size n = 10,000, most
                            1
                            of the curves are in asymptotes, which indicates that most of the species are present at this size.

                                 Since diet can also affect the survival of bacterial models in the community model,
                            we postulated that the environmental conditions of the microbial population were food-
                            intensive, so all the simulations were performed under the rich diet. Finally, from 160 mu-
                            cosal microbiome samples, 88 microbiome community models were constructed based on
                            AGORA and Pan models (Supplementary File S3).
                                 The NMPC (net maximal production capability), which simulates the capacity of the
                            microbiota to create the intestinal lumen environment, was calculated by FVA (Supplemen-
                            tary File S4). This simulation was utilized to analyze the differences in the effects of the
                            microbiome in each group on the metabolic conditions around the tumor and intestine. We
                            consider the NMPC as the microbiome’s role in creating the intestinal environment.

                            2.2. Meta-Model Selection and Data Analysis for Simulated Metabolism of CRC Microbiome
                                 Studies have demonstrated that the CRC microbiota and its healthy counterpart have
                            diverse patterns [21], which are called a meta-community. Accordingly, we call models
                            with the same patterns a meta-model. Thus, we first detected the meta-models of all the
                            groups based on the NMPC data and then selected a meta-model for each group (n8, n9,
                            n22, n23, n26 and n27 as a normal meta-model; a3, a5, a20, a21, a28, a29, a34 and a36
                            as an adenoma meta-model; and c1, c7, c9, c10, c16, c18 and c24 as a carcinoma meta-
                            model). This step was performed by PCA (Figure 2). The PCA plots show the similarity
                            of the microbiome metabolic models based on their NMPCs according to the first two
                            components. Presumably, microbiome metabolic models with the greatest similarity in
                            NMPC data have the same patterns. We selected meta-models with the most similarity
                            within groups and the most dissimilarity between groups. Cross-validation with the
                            SIMCA software indicated the significance of PCA models, with R2X(cum) = 0.85, and
                            Q2(cum) = 0.727. Supplementary File S5 shows more statistical tests for this model.
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                                           5 of 20




      Figure 2. Scatter plot of PCA scores for all models. Using PCA, meta-models were selected for each group by considering
      the greatest similarity in groups (nearest) and the greatest differences between groups (farthest). a3, a5, a20, a21, a28, a29,
      a34 and a36 as an adenoma meta-model; c1, c7, c9, c10, c16, c18 and c24 as a carcinoma meta-model; and n8, n9, n22, n23,
      n26 and n27 as a normal meta-model. In this figure, a, c and n stand for adenoma, carcinoma and normal, respectively. This
      PCA was plotted by the first two components, in which R2X[1] = 0.417 and R2X[2] = 0.21.
                                                                    2

                                  2.3. Meta-Models Reveal Different Patterns Among CRC Tumors
                                        We used pairwise PLS-DA to find metabolic patterns among the meta-models of each
                                  group. PLS-DA is an efficient tool for analyzing metabolomic data [33]. It can effectively
                                  find patterns for differentiation between carcinoma vs. normal (Figures 3 and 4), adenoma
                                  vs. normal (Figures 5 and 6) and carcinoma vs. adenoma (Figures 7 and 8) groups. In all the
                                  PLS-DA models’ first components, the most important metabolites that were involved in
                                  this differentiation were extracted from a VIP plot with a VIP criterion more than 1 [34,35].
                                  We performed a cross-validation analysis of the PLS-DA models using the SIMCA software
                                  (which returns the significance of models). Supplementary File S5 describes the statistical
                                  parameters of the PLS-DA models in detail.
                                        Metabolite set enrichment analysis (MSEA) was used to determine the role of metabo-
                                  lites in human cell metabolism. For this purpose, VIP was used to extract metabolites
                                  that were involved in human metabolism, filtered by the VMH database. This analysis
                                  was performed for metabolites that were increased or decreased in a pairwise analysis of
                                  groups. p-values < 0.05 were considered significant for the pathways detected in MSEA.
                                  Therefore, the results show that microbiota-derived metabolites could be involved in CRC
                                  metabolism by altering pathways under different conditions during CRC progression.
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                                  6 of 20




      Figure 3. Extraction of the most important metabolites in carcinoma vs. normal meta-model comparison. The column plot
      of metabolites excluded by the VIP plot shows which metabolite correlates with which group. Red columns (positive w*c)
      are metabolites more abundant in carcinoma, and blue columns (negative w*c) are those more abundant in the normal
      group. These w*c measures are from the first component of the PLS-DA model. For this PLS-DA model, the first component
      R2 and Q2 parameters were R2X = 0.532 and Q2 = 0.972.




                                                                3




      Figure 4. MSEA of the most important metabolites in PLS model of carcinoma vs. normal. Metabolites more abundant
      in carcinoma meta-models than normal meta-models involved in pathways are shown in the left-side table. Those more
      abundant in normal are shown in the right-side table. We considered p-values < 0.05 significant for this analysis.

                                                                        4
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                                   7 of 20




      Figure 5. Extraction of most important metabolites in adenoma vs. normal meta-model comparison. The column plot of
      metabolites excluded by the VIP plot shows which metabolite correlates with which group. Red columns (positive w*c) are
      metabolites more abundant in adenoma, and blue columns (negative w*c) are those more abundant in the normal group.
      These w*c measures are from the first component of the PLS-DA model. For this PLS-DA model, the first component R2 and
      Q2 parameters were R2X = 0.783 and Q2 = 0.976.




                                                                5




      Figure 6. MSEA of the most important metabolites in PLS-DA model of adenoma vs. normal. Metabolites more abundant
      in the adenoma meta-model than the normal meta-model involved in pathways are shown in the left-side table. Those more
      abundant in normal are shown in the right-side table. We considered p-values < 0.05 significant for this analysis.

                                                                        6
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                                    8 of 20




      Figure 7. Extraction of the most important metabolites in carcinoma vs. adenoma meta-model comparison. The column plot
      of metabolites excluded by the VIP plot shows which metabolite correlates with which group. Red columns (positive w*c)
      are metabolites more abundant in carcinoma, and blue columns (negative w*c) are those more abundant in the adenoma
      group. These w*c measures are from the first component of the PLS-DA model. For this PLS-DA model, the first component
      R2 and Q2 parameters were R2X = 0.572 and Q2 = 0.933.




                                                                 7




      Figure 8. MSEA of the most important metabolites in PLS-DA model of carcinoma vs. adenoma. Metabolites more abundant
      in the carcinoma meta-model than the adenoma meta-model involved in pathways are shown in the left-side table. Those
      that are more abundant in adenomas are shown in the right-side table. We considered p-values < 0.05 significant for this
      analysis.
                                                                         8
                                 2.4. Comparison between Carcinoma and Normal Meta-Models
                                      The results reveal that L-glutamine, L-tyrosine, pyruvate, tyramine, tryptamine and
                                 ten other metabolites were significantly increased in the normal meta-model. Furthermore,
                                 metabolites such as taurine, L-serine, chondroitin sulfate, mannose, putrescine and 73 other
                                 metabolites were decreased in this comparison (Figure 3).
                                      The MSEA results indicated that thyroid hormone synthesis, purine metabolism,
                                 phenylalanine metabolism, the urea cycle, ammonia recycling, tyrosine metabolism and
                                 amino sugar metabolism pathways were enriched in the list of increased metabolites. The
                                 decreased metabolites were involved in spermidine and spermine biosynthesis, galac-
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                        9 of 20




                            tose metabolism, the urea cycle, taurine and hypotaurine metabolism and phosphatidyl
                            ethanolamine biosynthesis (Figure 4).

                            2.5. Comparison between Adenoma and Normal Meta-Models
                                 Histamine, spermidine, putrescin, hydrogen sulfide, L-tryptophan and 75 other com-
                            pounds were the metabolites most significantly increased in the adenoma meta-model
                            compared with the normal meta-model. Butyrate, phenol acetate, cobalt, taurine and 69
                            others were decreased (Figure 5).
                                 As the MSEA demonstrated (Figure 6), the metabolites that decreased in the adenoma
                            versus normal meta-models are those contributing to purine metabolism, the transfer of
                            acetyl groups in mitochondrial pathways, the urea cycle and phosphatidyl ethanolamine
                            biosynthesis. Furthermore, the metabolites increased are those contributing to the urea
                            and TCA cycles; the metabolism of arginine, proline, phenylalanine, tyrosine and galac-
                            tose; the biosynthesis of cardiolipin; and the mitochondrial electron transport chain. The
                            biosynthesis of spermidine and spermine, unlike in the carcinoma meta-model, seem to be
                            downregulated.

                            2.6. Comparison between Carcinoma and Adenoma Meta-Models
                                  In the carcinoma versus adenoma meta-model comparison, we found shared and
                            distinct metabolites that distinguish these tumor types. Adenine, D-glucose, L-aspartate,
                            L-histidine, pyruvate and 32 other substances were substantially increased in the carcinoma
                            meta-model. Additionally, acetaldehyde, trimethylamine, putrescine, ethanol, hydrogen
                            sulfide and 85 others were significantly increased in the adenoma meta-model (Figure 7).
                                  Furthermore, in the MSEA, cycles such as TCA and urea, and the metabolism of
                            amino acids, such as arginine, proline, cysteine and alanine, were related to the increased
                            metabolites. The synthesis of spermidine, spermine and carnitine, and the Warburg effect
                            are related to these metabolites (Figure 8).
                                  By the comparison of important metabolites between samples, we found that some of
                            these metabolites are group-specific and some shared (Figures 9 and 10). It showed that
                            metabolites could be tumor-specific and have different roles in tumors. Notably, 37 metabo-
                            lites significantly differentiated between normal, adenoma and carcinoma meta-models,
                            and 13 specifically differentiated between two meta-models. As the driver–passenger
                            hypothesis states, the metabolites of the CRC microbiota show different patterns in ade-
                            noma and carcinoma tumors. Some promote tumors and are released or remain and
                            support tumor growth and development. Some metabolites only play a supportive role
                            in carcinomas. On the other hand, the significant downregulation of certain metabolites,
                            especially in the carcinoma meta-model, could be one reason for the detrimental effects
                            of the carcinoma microbiota. As Figure 9 and Supplementary Figure S1 demonstrate, the
                            carcinoma meta-model showed more downregulated than upregulated metabolites.
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                                  10 of 20




                            Figure 9. Significant metabolites in CRC microbiome. This heatmap briefly highlights significant
                            metabolites altered in different tumors of CRC by our CMMs. Blue and red colors indicate decreases
                            and increases in the intestinal lumen, respectively. White color means neither a significant alteration
                            nor a contributor.
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                              11 of 20




      Figure 10. Proposed workflow for metabolic discrimination analysis of microbiome community constraint-based models,
      from data preparation to data analysis.

                                3. Discussion
                                                              10
                                     Several studies have examined the association of metabolites with CRC. In vivo and
                                in vitro environments cannot accurately indicate the sources of metabolic changes, espe-
                                cially in CRC, where the gut microbiome is an inseparable part. Based on the results
                                of our microbiome community modeling and simulating the intestinal lumen metabolic
                                environment (we have summarized the main results in Supplementary Figure S2), we
                                hypothesized about how the microbiome composition affects CRC metabolism:
                                1.   The adenoma microbiome plays an important role in the mutagenesis and the pro-
                                     gression of the adenoma to carcinoma.
                                2.   The metabolic changes in the adenoma microbiota increase inflammation and regulate
                                     the immune system.
                                3.   The metabolites of the CRC microbiota contribute to the growth and proliferation of
                                     cancer cells in both adenoma and carcinoma tumors.
                                4.   Microbial metabolites of adenomas and carcinomas are involved in the progression of
                                     CRC, for example, (the inhibition of) apoptosis and invasion.
                                    Therefore, this workflow has the potential to investigate the underlying metabolic
                                mechanisms regulating CRC progression, and it can be adopted to other disease microbial
                                community models (Figure 10).

                                3.1. Adenoma Microbiota Plays an Important Role in Mutagenesis and Progression of Adenoma to
                                Carcinoma
                                     An increase in mutagenic metabolites and a decrease in their inhibitors involved in
                                the progression of adenoma to carcinoma were observed in the metabolism of the adenoma
                                microbiota. Short-chain fatty acids have many important functions within the human
                                body, and numerous studies have shown that their levels significantly change in the fecal
                                samples of patients with CRC [36]. Butyrate, one of the most important and controversial
                                metabolites of the CRC microbiota, is significantly reduced in adenoma compared to healthy
                                models. Butyrate is also involved in reducing inflammation and inducing apoptosis. In
                                addition, it prevents the accumulation and formation of microbiota that cause epithelial
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                          12 of 20




                            cell mutations by regulating the immune system of the intestinal environment [37]. On
                            the other hand, hydrogen sulfide (a toxic substance produced from the catabolism of meat
                            foods) prevents the oxidation of butyrate and causes toxicity by disrupting the barrier
                            of epithelial cells. It has been observed that these effects are more related to microbiota
                            activity than diversity [37,38]. In our study, we showed that, in adenoma models, as H2 S
                            increases, ROS increase simultaneously. This is a point to consider in the bacterial flora’s
                            role in pathogenicity, including CRC initiation.
                                  Subsequently, other metabolites showed cooperation in CRC initiation. Adenoma mod-
                            els predicted an increase in spermidine and putrescine, which are polyamines. Polyamines
                            play a critical role in mutagenesis and tumorigenesis by producing ROS [39]. The increased
                            nitrite and electron transfer chain (ETC) activity in the MSEA indicates augmented ROS
                            and mutagenicity. Nitrite acts as a precursor to N-nitroso compounds (NOCs) that are
                            genotoxic and cause an increase in ROS [40]. Trimethylamines, including trimethylamine
                            (TMA) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), are involved in DNA damage [41]. Increased
                            urea can also increase ammonia production. Ammonia is involved in mutagenesis and
                            tumorigenesis by damaging mucus, inducing genotoxicity and increasing ROS production.
                            Increases in urea, TMA and TMAO are seen in adenoma models compared to healthy
                            specimens [42].
                                  Our models provide more evidence for the adenoma microbiota’s influence in CRC
                            initiation by mutagenesis, although a VIP index greater than 1 was considered in the
                            isolation of important metabolites. VIP values of 0.5 to 1 could also be significant [43].
                            Ethanol and acetaldehyde are among the substances whose mutagenic role in CRC has
                            been discussed [37]. An increase in ethanol and acetaldehyde with a VIP of approximately
                            0.8 was seen in adenoma models. Increased tyramine was evident in both adenoma and
                            carcinoma models. It is genotoxic to intestinal cells. It also further damages cancer cells by
                            disrupting the DNA repair system [44]. In our opinion, despite the significant evidence in
                            this section, there is still room for further investigation in future research.

                            3.2. Metabolic Alterations in the Adenoma Microbiota Increase Inflammation and Regulate the
                            Immune System
                                 Some metabolites play a key role by being multifunctional at different CRC levels. Hy-
                            drogen sulfide increases inflammation by reducing the oxidation of butyrate and breaking
                            down the intestinal epithelial cell barrier. Furthermore, butyrate plays a role in reducing
                            inflammation and the accumulation of harmful species by interacting with the immune sys-
                            tem and producing a suitable environment [37]. Trimethylamines, in addition to inducing
                            DNA damage, cause inflammation [37,41]. Increased hydrogen sulfide and trimethy-
                            lamines and decreased butyrate in the adenoma microbiota meta-model, in addition to the
                            role of mutagenicity, showed increasing inflammation.
                                 Histamine is a chemical messenger made by immune cells that is also involved in
                            inflammation. Previous studies have shown increased production of histamine in CRC and
                            decreased catabolism in CRC adenomas. It may also play a role in the development of CRC
                            by affecting the histamine 2 receptor (H2R) [45]. Although the production of this substance
                            has not been studied in previous studies from the perspective of the microbiota and the
                            role of this organ, in the adenoma meta-model, histamine production was significantly
                            increased. Simultaneous reductions in chondroitin sulfate and glucosamine were observed
                            in both the adenoma and carcinoma meta-models. The possible effects of these two
                            substances on the initial prevention of CRC, with anti-inflammatory properties, were
                            previously investigated [46].

                            3.3. CRC Microbiota Contribute to the Growth and Proliferation of Cancer Cells in Both Tumors
                                 The complete urea cycle converts excess nitrogen to urea and excretes it in the urine.
                            This complete cycle is mainly active in the liver, but enzymes in other cells are responsible
                            for the synthesis of the intermediates of this cycle through the use of nitrogen according
                            to cells’ needs. Extrahepatic urea cycle enzymes are the only intracellular producers of
                            arginine, citrulline and ornithine, which are precursors for the synthesis of polyamines,
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                            13 of 20




                            nitric oxide (NO) and proline. In cancer, unlike in liver cells that secrete nitrogen, urea cycle
                            mediators, including arginine, proline and ornithine, enter anabolic pathways, and changes
                            in their enzymes contribute to tumor growth [42]. As ammonia production increases,
                            ammonia condensation with bicarbonate produces carbamoyl phosphate (CP) through
                            the enzyme carbamoyl phosphate synthase (CPS1), which prevents ammonia toxicity.
                            It has been observed that, in cancer, the CP barrier between the mitochondria and the
                            cytoplasm disappears, and cytoplasmic CP increases [47,48]. Finally, the CAD protein (a
                            trifunctional multi-domain enzyme including carbamoyl phosphate synthase 2, aspartate
                            trans-carbamylase and dihydro-orotase) converts cytoplasmic CP to pyrimidines, which are
                            required for cell proliferation. Furthermore, increased CPS1 expression has been observed
                            to be associated with a poor prognosis in CRC [49,50]. In the MSEA, the urea cycle was
                            increased in the adenoma and carcinoma meta-models, and it was shown that the CRC
                            microbiota may play a key role in increasing the activity of this cycle in human cells.
                                  Interestingly, arginine, proline and ornithine, which are important in the urea cycle,
                            were increased in the adenoma models. Furthermore, the increase in arginine and proline
                            metabolism in human cells was increased according to the MSEA results. Arginine and
                            proline replace glucose in the energy supply under glucose deprivation and energy defi-
                            ciency. The enzyme arginine succinate lyase (ASL) is highly expressed in various cancers,
                            including CRC, which produces arginine, NO and citrulline. Furthermore, the production
                            of intracellular NO from arginine is dependent on this enzyme, so the inhibition of this
                            enzyme has similar effects on the reduction of NO. NO promotes cell proliferation [42].
                                  The amount of secreted glutamine, an important hallmark metabolite of cancer
                            metabolism, was increased in the carcinoma meta-model. Cancer cells use glutamine
                            during glutaminolysis for cell growth and proliferation. This is one of the hallmarks of
                            cancers, and many treatment strategies have been developed based on it. Cancer cells use
                            mediators created in the glutaminolysis cycle to replenish the TCA cycle [51]. Glutamine
                            is probably needed for tumors to become malignant. By producing ammonia, glutamine
                            regulates the intercellular physiological pH of cancer cells as a buffer [52]. In addition to
                            glutamine, pyruvate was further increased in the carcinoma meta-model.
                                  Pyruvate is present in anaplerotic reactions in ovarian cancer and affects mitochondrial
                            functions [53]. By affecting the ETC, it causes the production of ROS and alters cell
                            proliferation [54]. The serine racemase enzyme produces pyruvate from serine. The role
                            of this enzyme in CRC becomes more prominent with the production of pyruvate, and
                            it aids tumor growth and is being investigated as a drug target [55]. Interestingly, our
                            models confirmed these findings: firstly, its gene is present in Firmicutes, Actinobacteria
                            and Fusobacteria, which are present and prevalent in CRC microbiota models. Secondly,
                            there were decreased levels of serine and increased levels of pyruvate in the carcinoma
                            meta-model and, thirdly, there is increased pyruvate uptake from the environment in some
                            cancers. Finally, the increase in pyruvate demonstrated its supportive role as an energy
                            supplier and in increasing cell proliferation in the carcinoma meta-model. According to
                            the results of our modeling, the influence of the microbiome in this regard can be very
                            significant.
                                  Despite the principle of ignoring the TCA cycle and the priority of aerobic glycolysis
                            in cancer cell metabolism, the TCA cycle was increased in the MSEA of the adenoma meta-
                            model. The TCA is involved in the production of required macromolecules and the energy
                            production of cancer cells [51]. From these results, we could deduce that the microbiome
                            contributed to an increase in the metabolic cycle, energy production and cancerous tumor
                            formation.
                                  The effects of hormones on pathogenicity and its origin are usually considered in
                            the physiology of a human body. The MSEA results revealed the enrichment of thyroid
                            hormone synthesis in the carcinoma meta-model. There have been many studies on
                            the effects of thyroid hormone and nuclear receptors on tumorigenesis and cancer cell
                            proliferation. Despite the heterogeneity in these studies, increased receptor expression in
                            CRC and increased risk in patients with hyperthyroidism may be of interest. It should
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                           14 of 20




                            also be noted that, given the environmental uptake of cancer cells, the role of microbiome
                            metabolism in the production and explanation of the effect of this hormone could be
                            important [56,57].
                                 Serotonin and dopamine were also increased in the adenoma meta-model. These are
                            neurotransmitters produced by the central nervous system and the gastrointestinal tract.
                            Clinical studies have proven their effects on the growth of tumors such as CRC [58–64].
                            Furthermore, the overexpression of the serotonin B2 receptor, which leads to increased cell
                            proliferation, is potential evidence of the effect of serotonin on CRC cell proliferation [65].
                            These roles in CRC were also proved by our models, but with the collaboration of the
                            microbiota.
                                 Other pathway alterations involved cardiolipin and ETC biosynthesis, which were
                            enriched in the MSEA results for the adenoma meta-model. Cardiolipin is present in the
                            inner membrane of the mitochondria; its overexpression and interaction with ETC proteins
                            in CRC cells increases and optimizes the efficiency of mitochondrial respiration [66]. The
                            inhibition of the ETC also reduces tumor growth [67]. Considering the role of cardiolipin
                            in membrane structure and its interaction with ETC, the effect of adenoma microbiome
                            of increasing cell proliferation through supporting mitochondrial precursors and energy
                            supply through the ETC has been demonstrated.
                                 The gut microbiome can also accelerate the production of purine and pyrimidine
                            precursors, supporting cell proliferation and energy supply. Our results show significant
                            increases in nucleotides, DNA precursors and purine metabolism in the adenoma and
                            carcinoma models. Adenine, adenosine and deoxy-adenosine, deoxy-cytidine, uridine,
                            guanosine and thymidine were found among the enhanced metabolites for both models.
                            Thymidine catabolism is a metabolic strategy of cancer cells that provides them with energy
                            by supplying carbon to the glycolytic pathway under nutritional deprivation [68].
                                 Phenolic acids and cobalt chloride have anticancer effects [69,70]. The decrease in
                            phenolic acids and cobalt in cancer models compared to healthy individuals is in good
                            agreement with the role of the microbiome in reducing cell proliferation.

                            3.4. Microbiome Metabolites in Adenoma and Carcinoma Are Involved in the Development of
                            Colorectal Cancer, such as through (the Inhibition of) Apoptosis and Invasion
                                 Our carcinoma meta-data model indicated the prevention of apoptosis due to a sig-
                            nificant reduction in the synthesis of taurine, spermidine, phosphatidylethanolamine and
                            phenolic acid metabolites. Taurine stimulates apoptosis, and its secretion in the carcinoma
                            microbiome may be reduced [71,72]. Spermidine, which was increased in the adenoma
                            model and was involved in inflammation and tumorigenesis, was decreased in the car-
                            cinoma meta-model. The dual role of spermidine in cancer was previously investigated.
                            Spermidine can play a role in tumor suppression by increasing apoptosis and autophagy,
                            and decreasing immunosuppression [39]. The reduction of this metabolite in the carcinoma
                            meta-model showed the role of the microbiome in inhibiting the anticancer effect of sper-
                            midine. The role of phosphatidylethanolamine in stimulating apoptosis by reducing the
                            mitochondrial membrane potential in hepatocytes has been previously demonstrated [73].
                            The decreased synthesis of this substance in the carcinoma microbiome probably prevents
                            apoptosis. Decreases in galacturonate and butyrate metabolites were seen in the adenoma
                            meta-model. Galacturonate-containing pectins have been introduced as drugs that increase
                            apoptosis, as well as carriers, and in combination with anticancer drugs [74]. A decrease in
                            butyrate, a substance that induces apoptosis, prevents cancer cell apoptosis [75,76]. The ele-
                            vated glutamine and pyruvate in the carcinoma meta-model showed that the microbiome is
                            able to provoke malignancy and cancer migration. Pyruvate has previously been shown to
                            support the migration and development of ovarian cancer [53]. The presence of glutamine
                            may also be essential for cancer malignancy [52]. Increased arginine and, eventually, higher
                            production of NO, dopamine and serotonin, indicated the potential for the microbiome to
                            affect cancer cell angiogenesis. NO can be involved in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
                            (EMT) and angiogenesis [42]. Clinical studies have shown the effects of serotonin and
                            dopamine on the angiogenesis of cancers such as CRC [65]. Fumarate affects the migration
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                            15 of 20




                            and invasion of cancer cells by acting on the killer cell lectin-like receptor C3. An increase
                            in this metabolite in the adenoma meta-model could confirm this effectiveness [77].

                            4. Materials and Methods
                                 In this study, we investigated microbiome metabolism in terms of the abundances of
                            microbiota and their distinct metabolomics in different tumors of CRC. For this purpose,
                            we used metabolic modeling and metabolomics analysis approaches including community
                            metabolic modeling (CMM), principal component analysis (PCA) and metabolite set enrich-
                            ment analysis (MSEA). We used metagenomics and the relative abundances of microbiota
                            data as the input for microbiome metabolic modeling. Figure 10 depicts the workflow used
                            for this study. To determine the compatibility of the input data with the methodology, we
                            preprocessed the metagenomic data.

                            4.1. Data Collection and Preprocessing
                            4.1.1. Taxonomy Assignment Data
                                The relative abundances of microbiota in different tumors of CRC were extracted
                            from the MGnify database (study MGYS00001248). The dataset consists of mucus biopsies
                            from 160 individuals harvested by colonoscopy and examined histologically [21], and 61
                            tumor-free specimens, 47 patients with adenoma polyps and 52 carcinoma patients.

                            4.1.2. Data Preprocessing
                                  To create a CMM, we require (1) the relative abundances of presented and recognized
                            bacteria, and (2) individual GEMs that match the recognized bacteria. For data consistency,
                            we manually modified the taxonomy nomenclature because metagenomic data often do
                            not have sufficient resolution at the strain, species and genus levels for the bacteria. For the
                            compatibility of the data with the taxonomy assignments, high-resolution taxon data were
                            matched with AGORA GEM models derived from the Virtual Human Metabolism [78]
                            (VMH) database. For non-compatible data, we used the “createPanModels” function in the
                            Constraint-Based Reconstruction Analysis (COBRA) toolbox [79] to construct Pan models.
                            A Pan model is a GEM constructed from a combination of some other GEMs.
                                  To modify the taxonomy nomenclature, we used the Disbiome database [28]. This
                            database presents the dysbiosis of the microbiome in diseases, and the nearest strain,
                            species, or genus affected by CRC according to its decrease or increase in abundance.
                            Taxonomy levels higher than family were matched to AGORA models and Pan models by
                            a literature review and using the Disbiome database.
                                  Data normalization is challenging in this domain. One of the most applicable methods
                            is rarefaction, the applications of which in metagenomics and microbiome analysis have
                            been discussed [29–31]. The average number of sample read counts was about 10,000.
                            To confirm this value, we also plotted the rarefaction curve (Figure 1) and considered its
                            asymptote. Curve plotting and data normalization were performed using the rarefaction
                            method in the Vegan [80] library in R.

                            4.2. Microbiome Metabolic Modeling
                                  Large-scale community modeling requires the integration of the relative abundances
                            of metagenomics data into metabolic models. For this purpose, we used the mgPipe
                            pipeline that is the part of the microbiome modeling toolbox in the COBRA toolbox. The
                            mgPipe function includes: (1) the analysis of the microbiota abundances per sample; (2) the
                            construction of microbiome models and adding lumen-transport reactions by connection
                            to a specific diet and uptake/secretion behavior; and (3) the simulation of models and the
                            lumen metabolic environment under the given diet by flux variable analysis (FVA). These
                            simulations demonstrate the maximal capability for metabolite production in a lumen
                            environment: the so-called net maximal production capacity (NMPC). The metabolic
                            modeling of the microbiome community was performed using the COBRA toolbox in
                            the MATLAB 2017b environment with the IBM CPLEX 12.8 solver. We used the mgPipe
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                                       16 of 20




                            pipeline and AGORA 1.03 [26] models and their Pan models to reconstruct CMM on a rich
                            diet. In fact, the rich diet supports the stability of the relative abundances of bacteria in an
                            environment without limitations in nutrient-uptake fluxes. Therefore, we selected the rich
                            diet condition for further modeling.

                            4.3. Data Analysis
                            4.3.1. Multivariate Analysis
                                  NMPC data show the maximum microbiota community capacity of each sample in
                            creating the intestinal lumen metabolic environment. This information was used to analyze
                            and compare within groups and between groups.
                                  PCA and partial least-squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) are two methods that
                            are important in the analysis of metabolomic data [33]. In this study, due to the high number
                            of features, we first ran PCA to investigate the similarity and discrimination between all the
                            samples and to separate similar models of each group—the so-called meta-model. Then,
                            PLS-DA was performed for comparison between groups.
                                  The variable important projection (VIP) used PLS-DA information to display each of
                            the variables in the first component of each PLS-DA model.
                                  The PCA and PLS-DA were performed in the SIMCA software environment of UMET-
                            RICS company version 14.1. Autofit was performed for PCA and PLS-DA modeling with
                            default settings.
                                  The cross validation of the PCA and PLS-DA was performed using the SIMCA soft-
                            ware, by full cross validation. The method used the Krzanowski and PRediction Error Sum
                            of Squares (PRESS) methods and returned the significance of the models [81,82].

                            4.3.2. Metabolic Set Enrichment Analysis
                                 MSEA [83] is an approach to identifying and interpreting patterns in human metabolism
                            through metabolic alterations according to metabolic data. The VMH database was used
                            to isolate microbiota-produced metabolites involved in human metabolism from all the
                            metabolites derived from the PLS-DA and then VIP extraction. These metabolites were
                            used as input for the Metaboanalyst platform [84].

                            5. Conclusions
                                Our community metabolic models unveiled the roles of the gut microbiome in CRC
                            development, as well as its significant influence on adenoma and carcinoma tumors, from
                            provoking mutations to facilitating the spread, homeostasis and survival of colorectal
                            cancer cells.

                            Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/10
                            .3390/metabo11070456/s1. Supplementary File S1: Pan AGORA models (upon request), Supplemen-
                            tary File S2: Bacterial GEMs’ names and their abundances for further analysis, Supplementary File S3:
                            Microbiome community models (upon request), Supplementary File S4: Results for net maximal
                            production capability, Supplementary File S5: Statistical results of PCA and PLS-DA, Figure S1: Venn
                            diagram of VIP > 1 metabolites. Figure S2: Hypothesized about how the microbiome composition
                            affects CRC metabolism.
                            Author Contributions: Conceptualization, P.S., M.E.-B., M.J., F.M.K., O.W., and A.S.-Y.; data curation,
                            P.S.; formal analysis, P.S.; investigation, P.S., M.E.-B., M.J., and A.S.-Y.; methodology, P.S. and A.S.-Y.;
                            supervision, M.E.-B. and A.S.-Y.; validation, P.S.; visualization, P.S.; writing—original draft, P.S. and
                            A.S.-Y.; writing—review and editing, P.S., M.E.-B., M.J., F.M.K., O.W., and A.S.-Y. All authors have
                            read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                            Funding: The German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) supported this work
                            as part of the SASKit project (FKZ 01ZX1903B). Furthermore, this work was supported in part by
                            Shahrekord University.
                            Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                                              17 of 20




                                   Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Data Availability Statement: All the data are available at https://www.ebi.ac.uk/metagenomics/
                                   search?query=MGYS00001248 (accessed on 23 September 2020).
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Dalton-Griffin, L.; Kellam, P. Infectious causes of cancer and their detection. J. Biol. 2009, 8, 67. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Claesson, M.J.; Cusack, S.; O’Sullivan, O.; Greene-Diniz, R.; de Weerd, H.; Flannery, E.; Marchesi, J.R.; Falush, D.; Dinan, T.;
      Fitzgerald, G.; et al. Composition, variability, and temporal stability of the intestinal microbiota of the elderly. Proc. Natl. Acad.
      Sci. USA 2011, 108 (Suppl. 1), 4586–4591. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.    Dethlefsen, L.; Eckburg, P.B.; Bik, E.M.; Relman, D.A. Assembly of the human intestinal microbiota. Trends Ecol. Evol. 2006, 21,
      517–523. [CrossRef]
4.    Marchesi, J.R. Human distal gut microbiome. Environ. Microbiol. 2011, 13, 3088–3102. [CrossRef]
5.    Qin, J.; Li, R.; Raes, J.; Arumugam, M.; Burgdorf, K.S.; Manichanh, C.; Nielsen, T.; Pons, N.; Levenez, F.; Yamada, T.; et al. A
      human gut microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing. Nature 2010, 464, 59–65. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Jemal, A.; Siegel, R.; Ward, E.; Hao, Y.; Xu, J.; Thun, M.J. Cancer statistics, 2009. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2009, 59, 225–249. [CrossRef]
7.    Proctor, L.M. The Human Microbiome Project in 2011 and beyond. Cell Host Microbe 2011, 10, 287–291. [CrossRef]
8.    Griffin, J.L. Metabolic profiles to define the genome: Can we hear the phenotypes? Philos. Trans. R. Soc. L. B Biol. Sci. 2004, 359,
      857–871. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.    Griffin, J.L.; Shockcor, J.P. Metabolic profiles of cancer cells. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2004, 4, 551–561. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.   Patton, A.L.; Seely, K.A.; Chimalakonda, K.C.; Tran, J.P.; Trass, M.; Miranda, A.; Fantegrossi, W.E.; Kennedy, P.D.; Dobrowolski,
      P.; Radominska-Pandya, A.; et al. Targeted metabolomic approach for assessing human synthetic cannabinoid exposure and
      pharmacology. Anal. Chem. 2013, 85, 9390–9399. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.   Robertson, D.G.; Watkins, P.B.; Reily, M.D. Metabolomics in toxicology: Preclinical and clinical applications. Toxicol. Sci. 2011, 120
      (Suppl. 1), S146–S170. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Roessner, U.; Luedemann, A.; Brust, D.; Fiehn, O.; Linke, T.; Willmitzer, L.; Fernie, A. Metabolic profiling allows comprehensive
      phenotyping of genetically or environmentally modified plant systems. Plant Cell 2001, 13, 11–29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   Cazzaniga, P.; Damiani, C.; Besozzi, D.; Colombo, R.; Nobile, M.S.; Gaglio, D.; Pescini, D.; Molinari, S.; Mauri, G.; Alberghina, L.;
      et al. Computational strategies for a system-level understanding of metabolism. Metabolites 2014, 4, 1034. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Kim, H.U.; Kim, T.Y.; Lee, S.Y. Metabolic flux analysis and metabolic engineering of microorganisms. Mol. Biosyst. 2008, 4,
      113–120. [CrossRef]
15.   Orth, J.D.; Thiele, I.; Palsson, B.Ø. What is flux balance analysis? Nat. Biotechnol. 2010, 28, 245–248. [CrossRef]
16.   Shoaie, S.; Nielsen, J. Elucidating the interactions between the human gut microbiota and its host through metabolic modeling.
      Front. Genet. 2014, 5, 86. [CrossRef]
17.   Stolyar, S.; Van Dien, S.; Hillesland, K.L.; Pinel, N.; Lie, T.J.; Leigh, J.A.; Stahl, D.A. Metabolic modeling of a mutualistic microbial
      community. Mol. Syst. Biol. 2007, 3, 92. [CrossRef]
18.   Mendes-Soares, H.; Chia, N. Community metabolic modeling approaches to understanding the gut microbiome: Bridging
      biochemistry and ecology. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2017, 105, 102–109. [CrossRef]
19.   Kumar, M.; Ji, B.; Babaei, P.; Das, P.; Lappa, D.; Ramakrishnan, G.; Fox, T.E.; Haque, R.; Petri, W.A.; Bäckhed, F.; et al. Gut
      microbiota dysbiosis is associated with malnutrition and reduced plasma amino acid levels: Lessons from genome-scale metabolic
      modeling. Metab. Eng. 2018, 49, 128–142. [CrossRef]
20.   Rosario, D.; Benfeitas, R.; Bidkhori, G.; Zhang, C.; Uhlen, M.; Shoaie, S.; Mardinoglu, A. Understanding the Representative Gut
      Microbiota Dysbiosis in Metformin-Treated Type 2 Diabetes Patients Using Genome-Scale Metabolic Modeling. Front. Physiol.
      2018, 9, 775. [CrossRef]
21.   Nakatsu, G.; Li, X.; Zhou, H.; Sheng, J.; Wong, S.H.; Wu, W.K.K.; Ng, S.C.; Tsoi, H.; Dong, Y.; Zhang, N.; et al. Gut mucosal
      microbiome across stages of colorectal carcinogenesis. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 8727. [CrossRef]
22.   Tjalsma, H.; Boleij, A.; Marchesi, J.R.; Dutilh, B.E. A bacterial driver–passenger model for colorectal cancer: Beyond the usual
      suspects. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2012, 10, 575–582. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.   Xu, K.; Jiang, B. Analysis of Mucosa-Associated Microbiota in Colorectal Cancer. Med. Sci. Monit. 2017, 23, 4422–4430. [CrossRef]
24.   Hertel, J.; Heinken, A.; Martinelli, F.; Thiele, I. Integration of constraint-based modeling with fecal metabolomics reveals large
      deleterious effects of Fusobacterium spp. on community butyrate production. Gut Microbes 2021, 13, 1915673. [CrossRef]
25.   MGnify. Human Gut Environment Targeted Loci Environmental. Available online: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/metagenomics/
      studies/MGYS00001248 (accessed on 23 September 2020).
26.   Magnúsdóttir, S.; Heinken, A.; Kutt, L.; Ravcheev, D.A.; Bauer, E.; Noronha, A.; Greenhalgh, K.; Jäger, C.; Baginska, J.; Wilmes, P.;
      et al. Generation of genome-scale metabolic reconstructions for 773 members of the human gut microbiota. Nat. Biotechnol. 2017,
      35, 81–89. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.   Machado, D.; Andrejev, S.; Tramontano, M.; Patil, K.R. Fast automated reconstruction of genome-scale metabolic models for
      microbial species and communities. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018, 46, 7542–7553. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                                          18 of 20




28.   Janssens, Y.; Nielandt, J.; Bronselaer, A.; Debunne, N.; Verbeke, F.; Wynendaele, E.; Van Immerseel, F.; Vandewynckel, Y.P.; De Tré,
      G.; De Spiegeleer, B. Disbiome database: Linking the microbiome to disease. BMC Microbiol. 2018, 18, 50. [CrossRef]
29.   Weiss, S.; Xu, Z.Z.; Peddada, S.; Amir, A.; Bittinger, K.; Gonzalez, A.; Lozupone, C.; Zaneveld, J.R.; Vázquez-Baeza, Y.; Birmingham,
      A.; et al. Normalization and microbial differential abundance strategies depend upon data characteristics. Microbiome 2017, 5, 27.
      [CrossRef]
30.   McMurdie, P.J.; Holmes, S. Waste Not, Want Not: Why Rarefying Microbiome Data Is Inadmissible. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2014, 10,
      e1003531. [CrossRef]
31.   Calle, M.L. Statistical Analysis of Metagenomics Data. Genom. Inf. 2019, 17, e6. [CrossRef]
32.   Navas-Molina, J.A.; Peralta-Sánchez, J.M.; González, A.; McMurdie, P.J.; Vázquez-Baeza, Y.; Xu, Z.; Ursell, L.K.; Lauber, C.; Zhou,
      H.; Song, S.J.; et al. Advancing our understanding of the human microbiome using QIIME. Methods Enzymol. 2013, 531, 371–444.
      [CrossRef]
33.   Worley, B.; Powers, R. Multivariate Analysis in Metabolomics. Curr. Metab. 2013, 1, 92–107. [CrossRef]
34.   Chong, I.-G.; Jun, C.-H. Performance of some variable selection methods when multicollinearity is present. Chemom. Intell. Lab.
      Syst. 2005, 78, 103–112. [CrossRef]
35.   Sun, X.-M.; Yu, X.-P.; Liu, Y.; Xu, L.; Di, D.-L. Combining bootstrap and uninformative variable elimination: Chemometric
      identification of metabonomic biomarkers by nonparametric analysis of discriminant partial least squares. Chemom. Intell. Lab.
      Syst. 2012, 115, 37–43. [CrossRef]
36.   Adewiah, S.; Abubakar, A.; Yusuf, F. IDDF2018-ABS-0023 Butyrate acid as a potential marker for the diversity of gut microbiota
      in colorectal cancer patients. Gut 2018, 67, A1–A118. [CrossRef]
37.   Louis, P.; Hold, G.L.; Flint, H.J. The gut microbiota, bacterial metabolites and colorectal cancer. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2014, 12,
      661–672. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.   Nava, G.M.; Carbonero, F.; Croix, J.A.; Greenberg, E.; Gaskins, R. Abundance and diversity of mucosa-associated hy-
      drogenotrophic microbes in the healthy human colon Subject Category: Microbe-microbe and microbe-host interactions. ISME J.
      2012, 6, 57–70. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.   Fan, J.; Feng, Z.; Chen, N. Spermidine as a target for cancer therapy. Pharmacol. Res. 2020, 159, 104943. [CrossRef]
40.   De Mey, E.; De Maere, H.; Paelinck, H.; Fraeye, I. Volatile N-nitrosamines in meat products: Potential precursors, influence of
      processing, and mitigation strategies. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2017, 57, 2909–2923. [CrossRef]
41.   Chan, C.W.H.; Law, B.M.H.; Waye, M.M.Y.; Chan, J.Y.W.; So, W.K.W.; Chow, K.M. Trimethylamine-N-oxide as One Hypothetical
      Link for the Relationship between Intestinal Microbiota and Cancer—Where We Are and Where Shall We Go? J. Cancer 2019, 10,
      5874–5882. [CrossRef]
42.   Keshet, R.; Szlosarek, P.; Carracedo, A.; Erez, A. Rewiring urea cycle metabolism in cancer to support anabolism. Nat. Rev. Cancer
      2018, 18, 634–645. [CrossRef]
43.   Shaffer, R.E. Multi- and Megavariate Data Analysis. Principles and Applications, I. Eriksson, E. Johansson, N. Kettaneh-Wold and
      S. Wold, Umetrics Academy, Umeå, 2001, ISBN 91-973730-1-X, 533pp. J. Chemom. 2002, 16, 261–262. [CrossRef]
44.   Del Rio, B.; Redruello, B.; Ladero, V.; Cal, S.; Obaya, A.J.; Alvarez, M.A. An altered gene expression profile in tyramine-exposed
      intestinal cell cultures supports the genotoxicity of this biogenic amine at dietary concentrations. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 17038.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.   Losurdo, G.; Principi, M.; Girardi, B.; Pricci, M.; Barone, M.; Ierardi, E.; Di Leo, A. Histamine and Histaminergic Receptors in
      Colorectal Cancer: From Basic Science to Evidence-based Medicine. Anticancer Agents Med. Chem. 2018, 18, 15–20. [CrossRef]
46.   Ibáñez-Sanz, G.; Díez-Villanueva, A.; Vilorio-Marqués, L.; Gracia, E.; Aragonés, N.; Olmedo-Requena, R.; Llorca, J.; Vidán, J.;
      Amiano, P.; Nos, P.; et al. Possible role of chondroitin sulphate and glucosamine for primary prevention of colorectal cancer.
      Results from the MCC-Spain study. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 2040. [CrossRef]
47.   Kim, J.; Hu, Z.; Cai, L.; Li, K.; Choi, E.; Faubert, B.; Bezwada, D.; Rodriguez-Canales, J.; Villalobos, P.; Lin, Y.F.; et al. CPS1
      maintains pyrimidine pools and DNA synthesis in KRAS/LKB1-mutant lung cancer cells. Nature 2017, 546, 168–172. [CrossRef]
48.   Celiktas, M.; Tanaka, I.; Tripathi, S.C.; Fahrmann, J.F.; Aguilar-Bonavides, C.; Villalobos, P.; Delgado, O.; Dhillon, D.; Dennison,
      J.B.; Ostrin, E.J.; et al. Role of CPS1 in cell growth, metabolism, and prognosis in LKB1-inactivated lung adenocarcinoma. J. Natl.
      Cancer Inst. 2017, 109, djw231. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.   Lee, Y.Y.; Li, C.F.; Lin, C.Y.; Lee, S.W.; Sheu, M.J.; Lin, L.C.; Chen, T.J.; Wu, T.F.; Hsing, C.H. Overexpression of CPS1 is an
      independent negative prognosticator in rectal cancers receiving concurrent chemoradiotherapy. Tumor Biol. 2014, 35, 11097–11105.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.   Palaniappan, A.; Ramar, K.; Ramalingam, S. Computational identification of novel stage-specific biomarkers in colorectal cancer
      progression. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0156665. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.   Anderson, N.M.; Mucka, P.; Kern, J.G.; Feng, H. The emerging role and targetability of the TCA cycle in cancer metabolism.
      Protein Cell 2018, 9, 216–237. [CrossRef]
52.   Kodama, M.; Oshikawa, K.; Shimizu, H.; Yoshioka, S.; Takahashi, M.; Izumi, Y.; Bamba, T.; Tateishi, C.; Tomonaga, T.; Matsumoto,
      M.; et al. A shift in glutamine nitrogen metabolism contributes to the malignant progression of cancer. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11,
      1320. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                                            19 of 20




53.   Caneba, C.A.; Bellance, N.; Yang, L.; Pabst, L.; Nagrath, D. Pyruvate uptake is increased in highly invasive ovarian cancer cells
      under anoikis conditions for anaplerosis, mitochondrial function, and migration. Am. J. Physiol. Metab. 2012, 303, E1036–E1052.
      [CrossRef]
54.   Diers, A.R.; Broniowska, K.A.; Chang, C.F.; Hogg, N. Pyruvate fuels mitochondrial respiration and proliferation of breast cancer
      cells: Effect of monocarboxylate transporter inhibition. Biochem. J. 2012, 444, 561–571. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.   Ohshima, K.; Nojima, S.; Tahara, S.; Kurashige, M.; Kawasaki, K.; Hori, Y.; Taniguchi, M.; Umakoshi, Y.; Okuzaki, D.; Wada,
      N.; et al. Serine racemase enhances growth of colorectal cancer by producing pyruvate from serine. Nat. Metab. 2020, 2, 81–96.
      [CrossRef]
56.   Krashin, E.; Piekiełko-Witkowska, A.; Ellis, M.; Ashur-Fabian, O. Thyroid Hormones and Cancer: A Comprehensive Review of
      Preclinical and Clinical Studies. Front. Endocrinol. 2019, 10, 59. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.   Sirakov, M.; Plateroti, M. The thyroid hormones and their nuclear receptors in the gut: From developmental biology to cancer.
      Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 2011, 1812, 938–946. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.   Peters, M.A.M.; Walenkamp, A.M.E.; Kema, I.P.; Meijer, C.; De Vries, E.G.E.; Oosting, S.F. Dopamine and serotonin regulate tumor
      behavior by affecting angiogenesis. Drug Resist. Updates 2014, 17, 96–104. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.   Borcherding, D.C.; Tong, W.; Hugo, E.R.; Barnard, D.F.; Fox, S.; Lasance, K.; Shaughnessy, E.; Ben-Jonathan, N. Expression and
      therapeutic targeting of dopamine receptor-1 (D1R) in breast cancer. Oncogene 2016, 35, 3103–3113. [CrossRef]
60.   Moreno-Smith, M.; Lee, S.J.; Chunhua, L.; Nagaraja, A.S.; He, G.; Rupaimoole, R.; Han, H.D.; Jennings, N.B.; Roh, J.W.; Nishimura,
      M.; et al. Biologic effects of dopamine on tumor vasculature in ovarian carcinoma. Neoplasia 2013, 15, 502–510. [CrossRef]
61.   Sarkar, C.; Chakroborty, D.; Chowdhury, U.R.; Dasgupta, P.S.; Basu, S. Dopamine increases the efficacy of anticancer drugs in
      breast and colon cancer preclinical models. Clin. Cancer Res. 2008, 14, 2502–2510. [CrossRef]
62.   Asada, M.; Ebihara, S.; Yamanda, S.; Niu, K.; Okazaki, T.; Sora, I.; Arai, H. Depletion of Serotonin and Selective Inhibition of 2B
      Receptor Suppressed Tumor Angiogenesis by Inhibiting Endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase and Extracellular Signal-Regulated
      Kinase 1/2 Phosphorylation. Neoplasia 2009, 11, 408–417. [CrossRef]
63.   Jonnakuty, C.; Gragnoli, C. What do we know about serotonin? J. Cell. Physiol. 2008, 217, 301–306. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.   Zamani, A.; Qu, Z. Serotonin activates angiogenic phosphorylation signaling in human endothelial cells. FEBS Lett. 2012, 586,
      2360–2365. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.   Peters, M.A.M.; Meijer, C.; Fehrmann, R.S.N.; Walenkamp, A.M.E.; Kema, I.P.; de Vries, E.G.E.; Hollema, H.; Oosting, S.F.
      Serotonin and Dopamine Receptor Expression in Solid Tumours Including Rare Cancers. Pathol. Oncol. Res. 2020, 26, 1539–1547.
      [CrossRef]
66.   Dang, D.; Chun, S.; Burkitt, K.; Cruz-Correa, M.; Han, X.; Dang, L. HIF-αs promote mitochondrial cardiolipin synthesis and
      respiration efficiency. Cancer Res. 2008, 68, 4109.
67.   Zhang, X.; Fryknäs, M.; Hernlund, E.; Fayad, W.; De Milito, A.; Olofsson, M.H.; Gogvadze, V.; Dang, L.; Påhlman, S.; Schughart,
      L.A.; et al. Induction of mitochondrial dysfunction as a strategy for targeting tumour cells in metabolically compromised
      microenvironments. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3295. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68.   Tabata, S.; Yamamoto, M.; Goto, H.; Hirayama, A.; Ohishi, M.; Kuramoto, T.; Mitsuhashi, A.; Ikeda, R.; Haraguchi, M.; Kawahara,
      K.; et al. Thymidine Catabolism as a Metabolic Strategy for Cancer Survival. Cell Rep. 2017, 19, 1313–1321. [CrossRef]
69.   Mahey, S.; Kumar, R.; Arora, R.; Mahajan, J.; Arora, S.; Bhardwaj, R.; Thukral, A.K. Effect of cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate on
      some human cancer cell lines. Springerplus 2016, 5, 930. [CrossRef]
70.   Rosa, L.; Nja, S. Anticancer Properties of Phenolic Acids in Colon Cancer—A Review. J. Nutr. Food Sci. 2016, 6, 1000468. [CrossRef]
71.   Zhang, X.; Tu, S.; Wang, Y.; Xu, B.; Wan, F. Mechanism of taurine-induced apoptosis in human colon cancer cells. Acta Biochim.
      Biophys. Sin. 2014, 46, 261–272. [CrossRef]
72.   Tu, S.; Zhang, X.-L.; Wan, H.-F.; Xia, Y.-Q.; Liu, Z.-Q.; Yang, X.-H.; Wan, F.-S. Effect of taurine on cell proliferation and apoptosis
      human lung cancer A549 cells. Oncol. Lett. 2018, 15, 5473–5480. [CrossRef]
73.   Yao, Y.; Huang, C.; Li, Z.-F.; Wang, A.-Y.; Ying, L.; Zhao, X.-G.; Luo, Y.; Ni, L.; Zhang, W.-G.; Song, T.-S. Exogenous phos-
      phatidylethanolamine induces apoptosis of human hepatoma HepG2 cells via the bcl-2/Bax pathway. World J. Gastroenterol. 2009,
      15, 1751–1758. [CrossRef]
74.   Frank, L.A.; Gazzi, R.P.; Pohlmann, A.R.; Guterres, S.S. New Pectin-based Approaches for Colon Cancer Treatment. EC Pharmacol.
      Toxicol. 2020, 7–9.
75.   Fung, K.Y.C.; Brierley, G.V.; Henderson, S.; Hoffmann, P.; McColl, S.R.; Lockett, T.; Head, R.; Cosgrove, L. Butyrate-induced
      apoptosis in HCT116 colorectal cancer cells includes induction of a cell stress response. J. Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 1860–1869.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76.   Xu, S.; Liu, C.X.; Xu, W.; Huang, L.; Zhao, J.Y.; Zhao, S.M. Butyrate induces apoptosis by activating PDC and inhibiting complex i
      through SIRT3 inactivation. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 2017, 2, 16035. [CrossRef]
77.   Park, H.; Ohshima, K.; Nojima, S.; Tahara, S.; Kurashige, M.; Hori, Y.; Okuzaki, D.; Wada, N.; Ikeda, J.; Morii, E. Adenylosuccinate
      lyase enhances aggressiveness of endometrial cancer by increasing killer cell lectin-like receptor C3 expression by fumarate. Lab.
      Investig. 2018, 98, 449–461. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.   Noronha, A.; Modamio, J.; Jarosz, Y.; Guerard, E.; Sompairac, N.; Preciat, G.; Daníelsdóttir, A.D.; Krecke, M.; Merten, D.;
      Haraldsdóttir, H.S.; et al. The Virtual Metabolic Human database: Integrating human and gut microbiome metabolism with
      nutrition and disease. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019, 47, D614–D624. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 456                                                                                                      20 of 20




79.   Heirendt, L.; Arreckx, S.; Pfau, T.; Mendoza, S.N.; Richelle, A.; Heinken, A.; Haraldsdóttir, H.S.; Wachowiak, J.; Keating, S.M.;
      Vlasov, V.; et al. Creation and analysis of biochemical constraint-based models using the COBRA Toolbox v.3.0. Nat. Protoc. 2019,
      14, 639–702. [CrossRef]
80.   Oksanen, J. Vegan: Ecological Diversity. R Package Version 2.4-4. 2017. Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/
      publication/323265820_vegan_Community_Ecology_Package_R_package_version_24-4_http_s (accessed on 23 September 2020).
81.   Eastment, H.T.; Krzanowski, W.J. Cross-Validatory Choice of the Number of Components from a Principal Component Analysis.
      Technometrics 1982, 24, 73–77. [CrossRef]
82.   De Jong, S. Multivariate calibration, H. Martens and T. Naes, Wiley, New York, 1989. ISBN 0 471 90979 3. 504. J. Chemom. 1990, 4,
      441. [CrossRef]
83.   Xia, J.; Wishart, D.S. MSEA: A web-based tool to identify biologically meaningful patterns in quantitative metabolomic data.
      Nucleic Acids Res. 2010, 38, W71–W77. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.   Chong, J.; Wishart, D.S.; Xia, J. Using MetaboAnalyst 4.0 for Comprehensive and Integrative Metabolomics Data Analysis. Curr.
      Protoc. Bioinform. 2019, 68, e86. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
